
El Cano Incident

Havana PRESNA LATINA in Spanish to Latin America 1732 GMT 30 June 1962-E
(OFFICIAL USE ONLY)

(Excerpt) Elsewhere in his speech, referring to the inequalities that
"exist and will unfortunately continue to exist for some years in Cuba,"
Fidel said that in order to combat those ills revolutionary unity is even
more necessary, "because the duration of these privileges will be shorter
the more classes dare defy the power of the revolution."

Then he spoke of the case of El Cano locality in neighboring Marianao
district, where several enemies of the revolutionary government decreed a
shutdown of some stores in solidarity with small subversive group that
fired on a militia sentry while a company of the revolutionary national
militia was engaged in training exercises. The assailants lost one man.
Continuing his explanation of the case, Fidel said that administration of
the stores that shut down was put in the hands of the revolutionary
organizations of the locality, "a zone of much rotten political influence
of the old bosses, where the bourgeois owned all the business and gave the
workers the worst treatment. Of course the owners of the businesses taken
over were left something to live on until they adapt themselves or go to
Miami."

And then he said: "Let this example serve as a warning to the counter-
revolutionaries and bourgeois that we are not playing at revolution, and
show them what they can expect if they challenge the power of the
proletarian revolution."

Coming back to the importance of the revolutionary instruction schools, the
Premier stressed that "a great spirit of self-sacrifice must be devoted to
these schools and the party. The students must be told how our revolution
is going through a period of acute class warfare, how there exist enemies
with a profound hatred of the proletariat, with their eyes turned to the
might of imperialism, dreaming of liquidating the proletarian revolution."

Emphasizing the need for a deeper revolutionary awareness, "for making of
every student who goes through the school a militant revolutionary," Major
Castro said that "what we cannot tolerate is the revolutionary who sees the
enemy on the street and does not check him, who hears the enemy speak ill
of the revolution and does not immediately answer him."

He went on: "Because if there is a revolutionary on the street and 100
enemies come, even if that revolutionary is alone he must stand up to the
enemies, fight them, and let himself be killed if necessary, because for
the enemy, anywhere we come upon him, our fist, hard treatment,
destruction!"

Stressing the point further, he said that "the enemy dreams of the time he
can drench the soil of the fatherland in the blood of proletarians,
peasants, and the poor, and restore his hateful, corrupt, infamous society.
And so every time they try it they will run into the might of the
revolution."

Premier Fidel Castro pointed out next that "we know this is a fight to the
death. It would perhaps not be the same if we were many miles further from
Yankee imperialism. And I say perhaps, because the Yankee imperialists have
their hand in every continent. But the fact that we are 90 miles from them
make our case special."

He continued: "We also know that peoples are unconquerable and capable of
the most unbelievable sacrifices. That is seen everywhere in Cuba, and it
will be seen more and more. It will be seen this 26 July, the fourth
anniversary of the triumph of the revolution, which will also be a day of
battle, of taking stock, of struggle. We will mobilize the people there on
the spot, in Santiago, to send the revolutionary message to all the
nation."

Fidel concluded: "With this spirit of struggle, of fight, of offensive,
you, comrades, must begin this new phase of the revolutionary instruction
schools; with this spirit you must teach your pupils."
-END-


 |

