
NCNA ACCOUNT OF CASTRO 26 JULY SPEECH

Peking NCNA in English to Asia and Europe 1741 GMT 29 July 1963--W

(Text) Havana, 26 July, delayed--Cuban Premier Fidel Castro said on the
10th anniversary of the armed uprising of the Cuban people that "the great
significance of this date lies in the fact that on that day, our people
began, on a small scale--if people say so--to embark on a road leading to
revolution."

Speaking at a mass meeting, held on the Jose Martin Revolutionary Square,
marking the anniversary, he said that the attack on the Moncada Barracks
"made possible what in the past had seemed impossible and made possible the
destruction of a modern army contrary to a series of theories according to
which the people could not fight these forces."

Castro continued: "What has taken place in Cuba is not miraculous; it could
also take place in many other Latin American countries. What has been done
in Cuba can also be done in many other Latin American countries, and even
can be done better." The road of the Cuban people is a very useful guide
for the hundreds of thousands of brothers in other Latin American
countries.

He said: We did not manage to take the Moncada Barracks at the time, but we
remained firm in our confidence. We firmly believed that that was the road
and undertook the task of pushing the struggle forward on the basis of more
mature experience. Finally the correctness of the road was borne out by
history, facts, and life.

For the people of various countries, he said, there is always a road; and
for the oppressed peoples, there is always a way to solve problems. But
this road cannot open by itself but must be opened by the people.
Revolutionary fighters should open this road. There is one way to open the
road, that is to open it; and there is one way by which the road will never
be opened, and that is when one does not want to open it.

He pointed out that the prerevolutionary conditions in many Latin American
countries are incomparably superior to those which existed in Cuba, and the
prerevolutionary conditions in some other Latin American countries are also
superior to those which existed in the country (Sentence as received). Some
Latin American countries are subjected to the plunder and exploitation of
monopolies and oligarchical forces. In those countries, the hungry and
desperate masses are waiting for breach for them to enter history. The task
of the revolutionaries is to make such a breach, he added.

Castro said that the duty of the revolutionaries is not simply to study
theory, but to find out a way, tactic and strategy by means of which these
ideas can emerge victorious. It is the duty of th e revolutionaries to do
this. It would never do to wait indefinitely for the road to open by itself
or to wait for a miracle in which the exploiting regime would disappear.

Touching on the situation in Latin America, Castro said that the situation
there is that of a continent in crisis and on such a continent revolution
is inevitable. He condemned U.S. imperialism for using the "Alliance for
Progress" as an instrument of aggression against the people of Cuba and
other Latin American countries and pointed out that the "Alliance" has
become insolvent. He continued: "But the (Cuban) revolution is firmly
established, very firm, as unshakable as a rock. The (Cuban) revolution
will witness the end of those treacherous running dogs who have betrayed
their country." He pointed out that "revolution consciousness is rising and
the fighting spirit is mounting in Latin America."

Castro paid tribute to the fighting Venezuelan and Guatemalan people. He
said that the revolutionaries should not facilitate the tactics used by the
U.S. imperialism but should hinder them in every way possible: nor should
they facilitate the U.S. imperialist trick of holding elections but should
try in one thousand and one ways to obstruct and oppose such elections.

He expressed fraternal greetings to the heroic fighters in South Vietnam in
their struggle against U.S. imperialism. He said that the imperialists are
resorting to the methods used in Vietnam to deal with revolutions in Latin
America but greater defeats are lying in store for them.

Castro said that the U.S. imperialists jumped at every opportunity to
create conflicts. He continued: "The never do anything to ease the tension.
We have had such experience in the past few weeks. What have the
imperialists done in the Caribbean? Have they taken steps to ease the
situation? No."

Dealing with the Cuban-U.S. relations, he said: "The Cuban Government has
put forward a proposal, as it did in the early days of the revolution,
declaring that it is ready to hold discussions with all those who are
prepared to work for the improvement of relations and with all countries
including the United States. But their answer is: new aggression against
our country, new aggressive schemes and activities and the adoption of a
series of steps to set up war bases in Central America to carry out
aggressive activities against Cuba." He said that this is characteristic of
the present U.S. Government. When Kennedy came to office, he talked glibly
about pursuing a new policy. What did he do? He invaded Cuba. Recently he
delivered at American University a speech larded with words about peace but
soon afterward he used warlike language during his stay in Berlin, Castro
stated.

Castro flayed the United States for its refusal to negotiate with Cuba. he
said: "If they do not want coexistence, what can they do? They do not want
to live together with us, but we are here and we shall remain here."

Castro dwelt on Cuba's internal situation in the last part of his speech.
-END-


 |

