
Further Comment

Havana Radio Progreso in Spanish 1555 GMT 16 July 1963--F

(Text) Maj. Fidel Castro, the premier of the Revolutionary Government,
participated in the opening of the Revolutionary House of Czechoslovak
Culture, at 23rd and 0 streets, Vedado. During his tour of the fair, the
Premier made some statements about the exhibited articles. "Once the
technique is mastered," he said, "we will begin to produce them on a
national scale, but production will not be abundant for the time being."

Maj. Fidel Castro stopped at the pavilion of special Spanish products made
in Cuba and he exclaimed: "This will win the emulation." Then he mentioned
the high quality achieved in the preparation of both Czech and Spanish
products. Fidel said: Capitalism was never able to do this. Capitalism was
never able to produce sausages of the quality of those exhibited at this
fair."

Noting that many of the proeducts were not identified as to the factory
from which they came, Fidel pointed out that for next year, the fair must
be held in an atmosphere of emulation and the products must be identified
as to the unit that produced them. In talks with Carlos Rafael Rodriquez,
Severo Aguirie, and Rogelio Barrios Cano, of the Consolidated Meat
Enterprise, Fidel suggested that the sausage factories should be divided
into two classes in the future: One for standard products, and others for
specialties.

Later, speaking with newsmen, the Premier said that it was necessary that
those who work on newspapers and the press in general improve themselves on
the front in which they are carrying out their activities. While he visited
the pavilions at the exhibit, Maj. Fidel Castro said: "Let us see if one
day we can see a fair of good articles. That would be very useful." Asked
his opinion of the fair, Fidel said: "Although we should not give too much
praise, I believe the work done is magnificent."

The sausage fair will last until next Sunday, the 21st, and the visitors
will not only be able to view the products, they will be able to taste them
as well. The people will become acquainted with new lines of products, such
as ham made of pigs' heads, ham made of tongues, Havana salami, special
sausages, and Czech sausages.
-END-


 |

