
CASTRO ADDRESSES HAVANA RALLY FOR ATHLETES

Television Coverage

(Editor's Note--F) Havana domestic radio and television services at 0059
GMT 30 June 1966 begin carrying live the ceremonies at Havana's Latin
American Stadium to greet the Cuban athletic delegation returning from the
Central American and Caribbean Games. A brief glimpse of Prime Minister
Fidel Castro is shown. The event begins with a band march, followed by a
student march past. Another shot of Fidel Castro is shown as he stands by
the reviewing stand, where the announcer describes the marching units.
Heavy rain can be seen falling. Castro smiles and waves at the marchers and
talks animatedly with members of his party. The athletes begin to file by
waving to the public; as they pass the reviewing stand, Castro applauds and
smiles.

At 0112 GMT the announcer says that Narciso Rabell of the Puerto Rican
Pro-Independence Movement is present. At 0114 GMT the announcer introduces
members of the athletic delegation by teams. Carlos Rafael Rodriguez of the
PCC Central Committee Secretariat and President Dorticos are in the
reviewing stand, as is Juan Almeida of the PCC Politburo. Fidel Castro
shakes hands with "Chocolatico" Perez, a boxer, and speaks to him. Castro
also talks with members of the party in the reviewing stand.

At 0131 GMT Castro gives a certificate to the crew of the Cerro Pelado, the
motorship which transported the Cuban delegation to and from Puerto Rico.
He shakes hands individually with the crewmembers. At 0133 GMT Dorticos
hands a diploma to the Cuban athletes. At 0135 GMT Manuel Gonzalez Guerra,
president of the Cuban Olympic Committee, speaks very briefly. At 0137 GMT
Education Minister Jose Llanusa, leader Committee, speaks very briefly. At
0137 GMT Education Minister Jose Llanusa, leader of the athletic
delegation, begins speaking; he concludes at 0218 GMT. Minister of the
Revolutionary Armed Forces Raul Castro can be seen on the stand. Prime
Minister Castro speaks to some more people on the stand; he is laughing and
smiling.

At 0224 GMT Fidel Castro begins his speech in vigorous fashion. Castro
seems relaxed and self-assured.

Television reception is generally good despite adverse weather conditions.
-END-


 |

