
Castro Speech

Havana Domestic Television Service in Spanish 0222 GMT 28 Oct 71 F

[Text of speech by Cuban Premier Maj Fidel Castro Ruz at the Alamar housing
construction project in east Havana during a tour with Soviet Premier
Aleksey Kosygin on 27 October-- videotaped]

[Fidel Castro's voice seems authentic and recognizable and his remarks are
translated into Russian in the background]

[Text] I just have two words to say because we have a tight schedule and we
still have to visit other factories. So you will forgive me if the meeting
is brief.

I want to congratulate you and tell you that it has been most gratifying or
me to show Comrade Kosygin the work you have been doing over the past few
months. Actually, you will recall that once there was nothing here [Castro
chuckles] and as the days passed we have seen the tremendous speed with
which these buildings are going up.

This is why I agree with Comrade Kosygin that in 2 years a whole city will
have been erected here. This has been obtained in the only way that it
could have been obtained--by working; by working seriously, selflessly,
heroically, as you have done; by working without counting days, without
counting months, without counting hours. Here we can see the results of
this.

Here you represent the workers of 150 factories. There are splendid workers
behind in the factories, good workers, exemplary workers. It is true that
the men selected to come here had to have one hallmark--that they were good
workers. They need not have been specialists. We need the specialists in
the factories.

However, you have created a new quality-level in work spirit, and, really,
what we always believed is that is we all worked like you have throughout
the nation, how much progress our fatherland would make in a few brief
years. [applause, cheers] If we all made best us of every minute of work as
is done here, if we all made best use of each pound of materials as is done
here; it we saved on lumber and other resources as they are conserved here;
if we used the cranes as they are used here; if we used the cement mixers
as they are used here; and if we used each one of the resources available
to use in this way, how much progress our country would make.

This work center is not characterized by having a great number of machines.
We just have a few cranes, only four cranes and we expect to build 100
buildings with them. How? By working day and night with cranes; [applause]
Not letting them rest for a single moment, [applause] maintaining them,
caring for them, suing them in a responsible manner.

Our country has received great assistance from the socialist camp,
especially from the Soviet Union. [applause] Much of the equipment in our
factories, a large number of our construction equipment and the
agricultural equipment in general comes from the Soviet Union. One of the
ways we can express our recognition and appreciation to the Soviet people
is to get the utmost use of these machines. To use them in an efficient
manner, to care for them, to improve work discipline.

When we toured this work center with Comrade Kosygin, we were reminded of
the effort and sacrifice with which the Soviets built their nation
[applause begins] since the Great October Revolution [applause continues]
in the middle of the civil war, despite the intervention of many foreign
nations, amid wars, seeing the fruits of their labor destroyed more than
once. We recalled how during the great war for the fatherland the Soviets
had to move man of their factories and erect them in the middle of the war
in 3, 4 weeks, in order to produce tanks, to produce arms, to produce
planes. That nations was built with a great deal of work, with a great
amount of heroism.

Amid the blockage, amid the imperialist aggression, amid the hostility of
imperialism, a little country like ours, 90 miles from the United States,
has had the opportunity of receiving foreign aid that has been of
extraordinary importance to our country. That nation, that industry, that
development was based on work.

Therefore when we invited Comrade Kosygin to visit this work center which,
in our judgment, is a model of revolutionary work, a model of communist
work, we were sure, [applause begins] we were sure that this would bring
back to him the enormous efforts that the Soviet people exerted in
difficult times.

Comrade Kosygin has lived through this long history of work and sacrifice
with the Soviet people. This is why we sincerely believe that this homage
by you, this simple homage of presenting him with a construction worker's
hardhat is not only a symbol of affection, of friendship, of the warmth
with which our people welcome the representative of the Soviet people, but
also a symbol of the outstanding worker in the Soviet economy, in the field
of the construction of socialism in the Soviet Union. In other words, we
are not only honoring a friend, a comrade, but also the construction
worker. [applause] That is all I wanted to say to you comrades and to
repeat with you--long live the friendship between our people and the Soviet
people. [audience shouts: viva!] Fatherland or death; we shall win.
-END-


