
FURTHER REPORTAGE, COMMENT ON CASTRO'S CHILE VISIT

Chilean People's Welcome

Moscow TASS International Service in English 1634 GMT 15 Nov 71 L

[Text] Santiago November 15 TASS--With unabating attention the Chilean
public follows the stay in their country of Fidel Castro, first secretary
of the Central Committee of the Communist Party, prime minister of the
Revolutionary Government of Cuba. This important even is highlighted by the
Chilean press, radio and television.

The commentators stress the friendly nature of all the remarks and
statements made by Fidel Castro. They specially stressed his words about
the genuine solidarity entertained by the Cuban people towards the Chilean
people.

"When we speak of solidarity, stressed F. Castro addressing a meeting in
Antofagasta, this means complete, absolute, unselfish solidarity of the
Cuban people with the people of Chile".

Touching on the character of the solidarity of socialist countries, he
cited the USSR which always comes to the aid of other states in the hour of
trial. "At a difficult time, F. Castro said, when the U.S. imperialists
refused oil supplies to Cuba, the USSR gave us four million tons of this
valuable fuel, and when it drastically cut our sugar quota, it was again
the Soviet Union that helped us by buying all our sugar. This help was also
given during the counterrevolutionary intervention in the Bay of Pigs.

The Chilean people warmly greets the distinguished Cuban guest. "The
enthusiastic welcome given the Cuban prime minister, said the foreign
minister of Chile Clodomiro Almeida in an interview to a PRESNA LATINA
correspondent, is the most convincing proof of the Chilean people's
feelings of sympathy and solidarity to the people of Cuba, to the Cuban
revolution". The general secretary of the Communist Party of Chile Luis
Corvalan stressed that "Fidel Castro's visit will strengthen friendship
between the peoples of Chile and Cuba and will render a positive influence
on the entire American continent".
-END-


 |

