
CASTRO SENDS FAREWELL MESSAGE TO SOVIET LEADERS, PEOPLE

Havana in Spanish to the Americas 1800 GMT 6 Jul 72 C

[Text] Prime Minister Maj Fidel Castro in a message to the people and
leaders of the Soviet Union which was sent from the plane which brought him
to Cuba, states that in the Cuban revolution the USSR and its Communist
Party have a stanch, true, and close comrade in struggle.

The leader of the Cuban Revolution emphasizes the gratefulness of the Cuban
delegation toward the Soviet Government and people for the warm, friendly,
and fraternal welcome extended by the Soviet nation.

This visit, the message continues, has allowed us to widen even more the
indestructible ties of revolutionary solidarity existing between the two
nations. It also has permitted us to hold an extensive and frank exchange
of opinions concerning the fundamental problems of the revolutionary
movement.

The first secretary of the Communist Party of Cuba (PCC), in his message to
the Soviet leaders, emphasizes that the friendship of the two nations was
forged over the past 13 years and is based on the common struggle against
U.S. imperialism.

The message also refers to the feats of the Soviet people in the political,
economic, social, scientific-technical, and military fields, which are
unprecedented in history.

The chief of the Cuban delegation in his farewell note to the Soviet people
points out that the achievements of the Soviet Union not only have led to
establishment of a gigantic socialist state, but also have made that
country a solid bastion of the world's revolutionary movement.

The Cuban prime minister reiterated that the awareness of the party and
Cuban Government has gathered strength in the Soviet Union's principled
policy.

In conclusion, the message states that the ties of friendship and
solidarity uniting the peoples, parties, and governments of both nations
are unalterable because they are inspired by the purest revolutionary
sentiments, the uniting force of history and Marxist-Leninist doctrine.
-END-


 |

