
GUINEA

CONAKRY RADIO BROADCASTS CASTRO VISIT COMMUNIQUE

Conakry Domestic Service in French 1615 GMT 8 May 72 N

[Only radio monitored version of Guinean-Cuban Joint Communique; for PRENSA
LATINA version of Communique, see p W 13 of 9 May DAILY REPORT]

[Text] Responding to an invitation by Comrade Ahmed Sekou Toure, secretary
general of the Democratic Party of Guinea [PDG] and president of the
Republic of Guinea, Comrade Fidel Castro, first secretary of the Central
Committee of the Cuban Communist Party and prime minister of the
Revolutionary Government, visited Guinea from 3 to 8 May, 1972. He headed a
delegation of party and government leaders, senior military officers and
leaders of popular and youth organizations.

Comrade Fidel Castro and his entourage visited the administrative regions
of Kankan, Kissidougou, Faranah, Labe and Kindia, including the Jamal Aod
an-Nasir polytechnic school in Conakry. The delegation participated in the
inauguration of the Kwame Nkrumah youth training center. The delegation saw
various cultural shows, including one staged by the Guinean national
ballet.

The delegation was given a massive popular reception at the 28 September
Stadium. Moved by the reception, the Cuban delegation thanked the
authorities and the Guinean people for their exceptional demonstrations of
friendship, affection and solidarity. Human warmth based on perfect
awareness of the Cuban revolutionary struggle characterized the reception.

During his visits, Comrade Fidel Castro was accompanied by President Ahmed
Sekou Toure. A climate of fraternity, friendship and similarity of views
marked the various discussions between the two leaders. Analyses of the
revolutionary struggle against imperialism, exchanges of mutual
experiences, and the relations between the countries occupied a high place
among the subjects discussed.

Concerning the Guinean-Cuban relations, the two leaders agreed on various
ways to further strengthening their relations at all levels. Present at the
talks between President Ahmed Sekou Toure, PDG secretary general and
supreme leader of the Guinean revolution, and Maj Fidel Castro Ruz, first
secretary of the Cuban Communist Party, were the following comrades for
Guinea:

Lansana Beavogui, prime minister and member of the National Political
Bureau; Ismael Toure, minister of finance and economic affairs and member
of the National Political Bureau; Mamadi Keitajn minister of education and
member of the National Political Bureau; Moussa Diakite, minister of the
interior and security and member of the National Political Bureau; Nfamara
Keita, minister of social affairs and member of the National Political
Bureau; Lansana Diane permanent secretary of the National Political Bureau;
Moussa Diallo, secretary of state for posts and telecommunications and
member of the Central Committee; Damantang Camara, secretary of state for
external affairs and member of the Central Committee; (Sidy) Sissoko,
secretary general at the presidency and member of the Central Committee;
(Senanyinon) Behazin, secretary of state for information; and Fassou Rene
Loua, Guinean ambassador to Cuba.

Present for Cuba were Maj Juan Almeida Bosque, member of the National
Political Bureau; Maj Manuel Pineiro Losada, member of the Central
Committee of the Cuban Communist Party; Maj Arnaldo Ochoa Sanchez, member
of the Central Committee of the Cuban Communist Party; Maj Raul Menendez
Thomasevich, member of the Central Committee of the Cuban Communist Party;
Capt Osmani Cienfuegos, member of Central Committee of the Cuban Communist
Party; and Oscar Ormos Oliva, Cuban ambassador to Guinea.

The Cuban delegation highly appreciated the role of the Guinean revolution
as a true spearhead of revolutionary struggle of the African people
fighting strongly against neocolonialism, colonialism and imperialism. The
Cuban delegation condemned the continuing aggressive activities of Portugal
and its NATO allies against the people of Guinea.

Maj Fidel Castro informed the PDG leaders of the Cuban people's
satisfaction at the Guinean people's victory over the imperialist
Portuguese forces and mercenaries who invaded Guinea on 22 November 1970
with the complicity of the espionage services of the FRG, France, Great
Britain and the United States.

In less than 72 hours, the militia and the army, supported by the entire
people in arms, crushed the mercenary expedition which had the support of
the fifth column organized by imperialist subversive services.

The Cuban delegation expressed satisfaction at the success of the Guinean
people and government in promoting the development of the people's militia,
and indispensable factor in the struggle against counterrevolutionaries and
imperialist and neocolonialist plots.

The Cuban delegation was informed about the preparations for new aggression
against Guinea and the training of mercenaries in Guinea-Bissau. The
delegation expressed satisfaction at the Guinean people's determination to
struggle until final victory against any new aggression.

The Guinean people, closely united, have an adequate revolutionary
leadership, perfect organization, discipline and political awareness which
turns them into an invincible force. They are able to defend their
independence and dignity with weapons in hand. They are ready to make any
sacrifice to defend their country whenever it is threatened.

Comrade Fidel Castro again reaffirmed that Guinea can always count on the
moral and material solidarity of the Cuban revolution in any circumstance.
The Cuban delegation praised the value of the patriotic and revolutionary
traditions of the Guinean people, who have never accepted colonial
domination. Inspired by the example of their ancestors, the Guinean people
have always said "No" to any attempt to compromise their independence and
their sovereignty.

President Ahmed Sekou Toure expressed his cognizance of the vanguard role
of the Cuban revolution in Latin America, the success it has achieved in
its defense, the efforts it has made in economic development, the example
it represents in Latin America--having built a socialist society only 150
kilometers from the most aggressive imperialist power--and its policy of
international solidarity with all peoples struggling against imperialism,
colonialism and neocolonialism.

Comrade Ahmed Sekou Toure expressed deep admiration for the Cuban people's
more than century-old fighting spirit. He particularly emphasized the deep
importance of the revolutionary attack on the Moncada military barracks,
which led to the emergence of the first socialist state in the Americas.

The revolutionary parties and governments of Guinea and Cuba condemned the
barbaric and inhuman bombing of the DRV and the destructive and genocidial
activities of the United States against the heroic South Vietnamese people.
They denounced the imperialist maneuvers and the policy of Vietnamizing the
war. The imperialists are prolonging the war with this policy instead of
finding a just solution.

Cuba and Guinea support the six-point peace plan presented by the
Provisional Revolutionary Government of South Vietnam. They consider the
plan an important contribution to solving the conflict on the basis of
respect for the legitimate rights of the people within the framework of the
sovereignty and the integrity of their national territory.

Cuba and Guinea share the joy of the people of Indochina at their present
serious offensive against the imperialist forces of aggression and their
lackeys and at the victory recorded on the battlefield. This is evidence
that the imperialists are heading toward certain defeat.

The revolutionary parties and governments of Guinea and Cuba support the
struggle of the people of Laos and Cambodia against U.S. imperialism, its
allies and its agents. They reiterate their support for the patriotic front
of Laos, the National United Front of Kampuchea and the Revolutionary
Government of Cambodia.

The two delegations expressed their solidarity with the Korean people in
their aspiration to reunify their country without imperialist interference.
They called for putting an end to provocation and hostility against the
DPRK.

The two leaders reaffirmed their unreserved support of the national
liberation movements of the people of Africa against colonial domination.
They expressed complete support for the African Party for the Independence
of Guinea and Cape Verde [PAIGC], which in continuing to record brilliant
victories under the leadership of comrade Amilcar Cabral in the struggle
for the freedom and complete independence of the country.

They also expressed satisfaction at the success of the people of
Guinea-Bissau--a success recognized by the UN Decolonization Committee. The
committee denounced the barbaric crimes committed by Portuguese
colonialism. The committee also recognized and supported the struggle of
the liberation movements of the Portuguese territories of Angola and
Mozambique.

The Cuban delegation expressed its gratitude to the Guinean people for
their gallant and strong support of the heroic struggle of the PAIGC.
Guinea and Cuba condemned the racist minority regimes in South Africa and
Rhodesia which are practicing a policy of apartheid with the support of
NATO.

They also condemned the role of NATO members as allies of imperialism in
protecting unjust and illegal colonialist and neocolonialist interests in
the southern part of Africa. They condemned the oppression of the Namibian
people of the South African racists. They denounced the repeated
aggressions by imperialists and colonialists-- particularly the Portuguese,
South African and Rhodesian racists--against Tanzania, Zambia and the Congo
because of the support for the liberation movements in that area.

These racist countries intend to compromise the independence of those
African countries. The activities of these racists countries are a serious
threat to the sovereignty and the territorial integrity of neighboring
countries and are in danger to peace on the African Continent.

During their talks on the situation in Africa, the leaders of the two
countries supported the legitimate rights of all nations to recover their
natural riches and to fully enjoy the national patrimony. Because of he
imperialists' attempts to perpetuate their domiantion and exploitation of
Africa's wealth, it is necessary for all revolutionary and progressive
governments, national liberation movements and progressive forces of the
continent to unite closely.

The Cuban delegation had the opportunity during its visit to appreciate the
extraordinary efforts of the PDG in rehabilitating the cultural values of
the people. The creation of a revolutionary and cultural movement of
international importance is a sure guarantee against the alienation by
imperialism of the personality of underdeveloped people. Men, women, and
children have shown in conduct, song and dance that they have rejected
anything that is incompatible with the realities of the Guinean people.

The Cuban delegation considers the Guinean people's efforts to rehabilitate
their cultural values a true and exemplary contribution to the
anti-imperialist struggle of the African, Asian and Latin American people.

Maj Fidel Castro noted that the people of Africa and Latin America have
been linked for many centuries by the same destiny. They have the same
aspirations. This link between the people of Africa and America is being
strengthened today in the struggle and common resistance against
imperialism--a resistance of which Guinea and Moncado are living evidence.

Maj Fidel Castro informed the Guinean leaders of his decision to visit the
Democratic and Popular Republic of Algeria, a bastion of revolution in
African and the people of the so-called third world.

On the Latin American situation, the two parties agreed that the present
revolutionary situation on that continent is caused by the strong
activities of popular forces and the suppression of the bourgeoisie
activities in most of these countries. This means that masses are now
taking up arms against the exploiters. Revolutionary forces on that
continent are becoming aware and are developing their struggle in villages
and towns in search of full and final independence through liquidation of
imperialists and their oligarchy.

The two delegations expressed militant solidarity with this struggle. They
strongly condemned the aggressive policy of the United States toward the
people of Latin America. They expressed solidarity with the Popular Unity
of Chile presided over by President Salvador Allende and with nationalist
measures taken by the Bolivian Government. They expressed support for the
anti-imperialist struggle of the Panamanian people for national
sovereignty.

On the Middle East situation, they expressed support for the Palestinian
people's struggle to recover their legitimate rights, and they expressed
support for the other Arab people to recover their land occupied by Israel.
They condemned the policy of illegal occupation of Arab territories. They
called for the immediate withdrawal of Israeli troops from these
territories. They denounced the financial and military support given to the
Zionist aggressors. They considered the growing power of socialist
countries an important backing for the African, Asian, and Latin American
people in their struggle for independence and economic development.

The Cuban and Guinean parties consider the immortal and unforgettable
personality of Maj Ernesto "Che" Guevara an example of international
sentiment and practice. They paid him glowing tribute in the name of all
revolutionary fighters of the world.

They expressed their admiration for African nationalists and fighters who
in the course of history have fallen in th struggle to defend their
countries. Among them Patrice Lumumba and Kwame Nkrumah are shining
examples.

In analyzing people's struggle against imperialism, Cuba and Guinea
proclaimed that no force in the world can destroy a people determined to
build a future. Those who talk of the invincible power of imperialism are
being proved wrong by the determination of people to struggle. Guinea is
demonstrating this in Africa, and Cuba is doing the same in Latin America.

These two countries have been able to victoriously resist the constant
imperialist aggression. Vietnam has been showing this daily through
destructive blows against the most powerful machinery of aggression ever
known to man. The time of the international gendarme is gone. This is the
hour of the people.

Cuba and Guinea proclaim the imperative need for the revolutionaries of
Africa, Asia and Latin America--who are suffering economic
underdevelopment, domination, discrimination, exploitation and imperialist
aggression--to close ranks daily. Exchanges of experience and militant
solidarity between our people will accelerate the end of imperialism and
will make a notable contribution to the final victory of the revolutionary
cause in the world.

In this regard, the two delegations decided to develop and consolidate all
practical forms of cooperation between their parties and governments, and
between their labor, youth women's and other mass organizations to render
the action of the revolutionaries in both countries more effective.

Comrade Fidel Castro reiterated the sympathy and the solidarity of the
people, the revolutionary government, and the Communist Party of Cuba for
the Guinean people, party and government and for the supreme leader of the
revolution, President Ahmed Sekou Toure, for his participation in the
anti-imperialist a struggle in Africa and the world.

The Cuban prime minister expressed his sincere thanks to the Guinean party,
government and people for their fraternal hospitality. He invited President
Ahmed Sekou Toure to visit Cuba. The invitation was accepted, and the date
will be fixed at the opportune time.

President Ahmed Sekou Toure thanked Maj Fidel Castro for his visit, a visit
which constituted an exceptional contribution of the Guinean and Cuban
revolution and to the consolidation of militant solidarity between the
people of Latin America and Africa.

[Dated] Conakry, 8 May 1972

[Signed] Maj Fidel Castro Ruz, first secretary of the Central Committee of
the Cuban Communist Party and prime minister of the revolutionary
Government of Cuba; Ahmed Sekou Toure, secretary General of the PDG,
supreme leader of the revolution and president of the Republic of Guinea.
-END-


 |

