
Joint Communique Issued

Budapest NEPSZABADSAG in Hungarian 7 Jun p 3 A

[Text] Budapest, 7 Jun--Communique on the official and friendly visit of
Comrade Fidel Castro to Hungary:

Fidel Castro, first secretary of the Central Committee of the Cuban
Communist Party and prime minister of the Revolutionary Government of the
Republic of Cuba, carried out an official and friendly visit to the
People's Republic of Hungary between 30 May and 6 June 1972, invited by the
Central Committee of the Hungarian Socialist Workers' Party and the Council
of Ministers of the People's Republic of Hungary.

During his visit, Fidel Castro and his delegation visited industrial and
agricultural centers, scientific and cultural organizations, and met with
workers, farmers, soldiers and students.

Everywhere the Hungarian people granted the Cuban visitors a warm welcome,
an expression of the sincere friendship and admiration they feel for the
fraternal Cuban people.

During his visit Fidel Castro met and talked with Comrade Janos Kadar,
first secretary of the MSZMP; Pal Losonczi, president of the Presidential
Council of the People's Republic of Hungary; Jeno Fock, premier of the
Council of Ministers of the People's Republic of Hungary, with whom he
carried out friendly exchanges of ideas regarding matters of mutual
interests to both countries.

In their talks, the Cuban delegation and the leaders of the Hungarian party
and government each related their experiences in building socialism in
their respective countries. There was a broad exchange of views on ways for
future strenghtening of the fraternal relations between the republic of
Cuba and the popular Republic of Hungary, and for increasing cooperation
between the two countries on the political, economic and cultural level,
and on all levels. The world communist movement, the national liberation
struggles, and the basic international problems of our times were current
matters of discussion.

They made it clear that Cuban-Hungarian relations have reached a
significant level on the political, state, social and cultural plane and
that existing ties between the two parties and peoples, based on the
principles of Marxism-Leninism and proletariat internationalism, confirm
this. They verified the positive results of their collaboration in the
fields of economics, science and technology. They examined the
possibilities of specialized growth offered by the Hungarian economy for
expanding and deepening the collaboration between the two countries. They
expressed their conviction that the current fruitful cooperation between
Cuba and Hungary jointly helps to consolidate the unity and support of the
community of socialist states and contributes to the progress of the
anti-imperialist struggle.

The Hungarian side expressed the deep respect, appreciation and friendly
sentiments of the people of the Hungarian People's Republic toward the
fraternal Cuban people, who, under the leadership of the Communist Party of
Cuba, have attained great results in building the foundations of socialism.
In the struggle against colonialism and imperialism, Cuba needed more than
a century to be able to enter the path of final liberation. This struggle
culminated in the revolutionary struggle that begin with the attack on the
Moncada Barracks. The advances in the transportation and modernization of
its semicolonial economy--which had been deformed by the imperialist
domination- the historical achievements of the revolutionary government in
education, health, culture and in the development of a socialist democracy
and its anti-imperialist and international policy, practiced together with
the socialist community, assure for revolutionary Cuba a growing prestige
in Latin America and in the whole world.

The Hungarian part condemned the imperialist blockade of Cuba by the United
States, and the enemy activities instigated by the United States. It also
condemned the illegal existence of a U.S. military base in Guatanamo within
Cuban territory and supported the demand of the Cuban people and government
for the unconditional withdrawal of the base.

The victory of the first socialist revolution in the American Continent was
the beginning of the end of the U.S. imperialist oppression of Latin
America. Socialist Cuba, an inseparable part of the Latin American
community, demonstrated that imperialism could be defeated in what had been
its redoubt until now.

Both parties stated with satisfaction that the U.S. imperialist' blockade
not only did not cripple the Cuban people's revolutionary impetus, which
was supported by the multilateral aid given by the Soviet Union and the
socialist community, but in fact tempered the people's cohesive force and
strengthened their resolution to continue the victorious building of
socialism in Cuba. Breaking the imperialist web of the isolation of Cuba
constitutes a significant success of the Cuban people, the socialist
countries, and revolutionary and progressive forces of Latin America and
the entire world.

The Cuban delegation expressed its recognition of the meritorious effort
made by the Hungarian people under the leadership of the MSZMP in the
political, economic, cultural, and social transformation of the country. It
also made clear its admiration for the courage and tenacity with which the
Hungarian communists have always faced all their difficulties, and paid
tribute to the antifascist fighters, those who gave their lives to the
cause, thereby contributing to the downfall of Nazi Fascism and the triumph
of socialism.

The Cuban delegation manifested its pleasure over the success achieved up
to the present by the Hungarian party's 10th congress in its tasks, as well
as its conviction that these will be implemented wisely.

The delegation, in the name of the Cuban people, the party and government,
expressed its thanks for the multilateral support and the cooperation
offered by Hungary in constructing socialism in Cuba.

The two sides expressed their firm resolution to continue developing and
strenghtening relations between their parties and countries in the
interests of their peoples and for the benefit of socialism and of peace.

The two sides emphasized the Soviet Union's support in the economic
development and in the defense of socialism in Cuba and Hungary, which
illustrates the USSR's decisive role in the struggle of the peoples for
their liberation and for the construction of a new life.

During the talks, both delegations discussed the present problems in the
communist and world labor movements and in international affairs, paying
special attention to the anti-imperialist and national liberation struggle
of the oppressed and exploited peoples of Asia, Africa and Latin America.

Both delegations agreed that the present time is distinguished by the
intensification of the revolutionary process. The world socialist system is
playing a decisive role in the advance of the revolutionary forces in the
world and in restraining aggressive and belligerent forces. In this common
struggle, fighting together with the national liberation movements, with
the working class in the capitalist countries, and with all the
anti-imperialist forces, the face of the planet is undergoing rapid and
vigorous change.

They asserted: Restoring, strengthening and consolidating the unity of the
international communist movement and the socialist countries constitute a
factor of outstanding significance in the great international struggle
waged against imperialism.

They reiterated their firm determination to continue doing all they can in
the future as they have done in the past, to accomplish these objectives.

Having analyzed the situation in Indochina, the two sides condemned the
American imperialists' brutal aggression and genocidal policy in Vietnam
and particularly the U.S. Government's latest measures: the blockading of
the DRV harbors and the systematic bombing of its communications network,
which amount to a flagrant violation of international legal norms and the
sovereign rights of other countries.

Cuba and Hungary state their full solidarity with the exemplary and heroic
struggle of the Vietnamese people, salute the victorious offensive of the
patriots in the South which is bankrupting "Vietnamization" policies. They
endorse and offer their total backing to the proposals of the DRV and the
PRGRSV, especially the seven points demanding an end to North American
aggression, the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of all U.S. and
allied troops, and the end of U.S. support of the Thieu puppet regime.

They voice their desire for the resumption of the Paris negotiations on the
basis proposed by the DRV and the PRGRSV in order to solve the conflict.

Both sides expressed their solidarity with the struggles of the people of
Laos and Cambodia against U.S. aggression and support the political program
of the Cambodian National United Front and the five points of the Laos
Patriotic Front.

The Republic of Cuba and the People's Republic of Hungary reiterated their
determination to continue giving all types of aid to the Indochinese
peoples so that they may achieve victory in their struggle against
imperialism.

Both sides supported the struggle of the Korean people for the withdrawal
of U.S. troops from South Korea and the proposals of the DPRK for the
peaceful reunification of the fatherland.

The Cuban and Hungarian sides firmly supported the struggle of the Arab
peoples and demanded the elimination of the situation created by the
Israeli aggression in the Middle East, the immediate withdrawal of the
Israeli troops from all Arab territory occupied since June 1967, the
recognition the legitimate and inalienable rights of the Arab people of
Palestine, and the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.

Cuba and Hungary stated that they are certain of the African people's
success in their national liberation struggle against colonialism and
neocolonialism.

Both delegations expressed their solidarity and support for the armed
struggle being carried out by the peoples of Guinea-Bissau, Cape Verde,
Angola, and Mozambique, as well as for the struggle of the peoples of
Namibia, Zimbawa, and South Africa, against the barbarous racist policy of
the Pretoria and Salisbury regimes.

In connection with the current situation in Europe, the two sides attached
great significance to the efforts being made by the Warsaw Pact countries
and other European countries for the consolidation of peace and world
security. They highly valued the progress achieved in recent years.

They granted special importance to the fact that European public opinion
favors the idea of carrying out the European security conference and
especially the fact that most of the European governments have stated their
approval to hold the meeting.

The Cuban side expressed its support of the efforts of the Hungarian
People's Republic and the other socialist countries to hold--without any
prior conditions--the European security and cooperation conference, for the
creation of a security system that will guarantee peace and cooperation in
Europe, which should have rewarding results for the international growth of
the struggle against imperialist violence against the peoples and for peace
and progress. They regard as a highly significant step forward the
conclusion of the treaties between the FRG and the Soviet Union and the FRG
and the Polish People's Republic and the four-power agreement resolving the
status of West Berlin, as well as the conclusion of the agreements between
the two German states on the basis of international law.

They consider as a vital premise for European and international security
and peace the prompt recognition of the GDR in accordance with directives
of international rights, and they favor the simultaneous admission of both
German states to the United Nations.

Both sides favor a general and total disarmament and back the Soviet
Union's proposal to call a world disarmament conference in which all
countries would participate.

The two delegations paid special attention to the situation in Latin
America. They noted that the Latin American peoples are more powerfully
confronting U.S. imperialism and governments serving its interests. They
saluted the struggle on that continent in which new classes and sectors
have actively joined along with workers, peasants and students who have the
revolutionary flag.

They gave their solidarity and support to the Chilean Popular Unity
Government headed by Salvador Allende. They also supported the
nationalistic measures taken in Peru and the just and legitimate hopes of
the Panamanian people for sovereignty over their entire territory.

The Republic of Cuba and the People's Republic of Hungary condemned the
systematic aggressive policy and intervention of the United States in the
Latin American countries.

The two delegations expressed their firm support for the right of the
underdeveloped countries to rescue their national wealth from foreign
monopolies and condemned the imperialistic practice of reprisals against
the growing economic and political independence movement in Asia, Africa,
and Latin America. They condemned the efforts carried out by the
imperialists to perpetuate the unjust situation of unequal trade that they
have imposed on the underdeveloped countries.

Both sides expressed their satisfaction over the visit of Fidel Castro and
the persons accompanying him, and over the talks and exchange of views
which were successful and which they held in a fraternal atmosphere, in an
atmosphere of understanding and friendly camaraderie. They strengthened the
ties of understanding and mutual respect between the two parties,
governments and peoples. New possibilities for strengthening the close
fraternal friendship ties and relations between the Republic of Cuba and
the People's Republic of Hungary on all levels, based on the principles of
Marxism-Leninism and prolatarian internationalism, were explored. The talks
held and contacts made, in which there was complete agreement of views on
the basic problems that were discussed, have been a valuable contribution
to the common cause of both countries.

Fidel Castro, in the name of the Central Committee of the Communist Party
and the Revolutionary Government of the Republic of Cuba, invited Comrade
Janos Kadar, first secretary of the MSZMP Central Committee, and Comrade
Jeno Fock, chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Hungarian People's
Republic, to make an official, friendly visit to the Republic of Cuba. This
invitation was accepted with gratitude and the date of the visit will be
set at a convenient time.

Budapest, 6 June 1972
-END-


 |

