
TEXT OF CUBAN-GDR COMMUNIQUE ON CASTRO VISIT

East Berlin NEUES DEUTSCHLAND in German 22 Jun 72 pp 1, 2 A

[Text] Replying to an invitation by the first secretary of the SED Central
Committee, Comrade Erich Honecker, and member of the Political Bureau of
the SED Central Committee and president of the Council of Ministers of the
GDR, Comrade Willi Stoph, Comrade Fidel Castro, first secretary of the
Central Committee of the Republic of Cuba and prime minister of the
Revolutionary Government of the Republic of Cuba, paid an official and
friendly visit to the GDR as head of a party and government delegation
between 13 and 21 June 1972. Everywhere they went, the welcome for Comrade
Fidel Castro and his entourage was very cordial and fraternal, which shows
the militant solidarity of the GDR party and people with the Cuban
revolution. He held friendly meetings with the people in their capital of
Berlin and in the provinces of Halle Dresden and Rostock, where he visited
industrial and agricultural firms, cultural and social institutions, as
well as a unit of the GDR People's Navy.

In Berlin the party-government delegation of the Republic of Cuba laid
wreaths at the monuments of the victims of militarism and fascism, as well
as at the monument of the heroes of the Soviet Army who fell in the
struggle for Germany's liberation from fascism.

During the visit, official talks were held between a party-government
delegation of the GDR headed by Comrade Erich Honecker and the
party-government delegation of the Republic of Cuba headed by Comrade Fidel
Castro.

The GDR delegation also included: Walter Ulbricht, SED Central Committee
Politburo member and chairman of the GDR State Council; Willi Stoph, member
of the SED Central Committee Politburo and chairman of the GDR Council of
Ministers; Hermann Axen, member of the Politburo and secretary of the SED
Central Committee; Werner Lamberz, member of the Politburo and secretary of
the SED Central Committee; Otto Winzer, member of the SED Central Committee
and GDR minister for foreign affairs; Paul Markovski, member of the SED
Central Committee and head of the International Relations Department of the
Central Committee; Georg Stibi, GDR deputy ministers for foreign affairs;
Joachim Naumann, ambassador extraordinary and plenipotentiary of the GDR to
the Republic of Cuba; Friedel Trappen, section chief in the international
Relations Department of the SED Central Committee and delegation secretary;
Dieter Kulitzka, head of the Latin American Department at the GDR Foreign
Ministry and delegation secretary.

The delegation of the Republic of Cuba included in addition: Carlos Rafael
Rodriguez, member of the Central Committee Secretariat; Flavia Bravo,
member of the Central Committee and minister of the foodstuff industry;
Joel Domenech, member of the Central Committee and minister for the basic
materials industry; Commandante Arnaldo Ochoa, member of the Central
Committee; Rogelio Acevedo, member of the Central Committee; Arnaldo
Milian, member of the Central Committee; Osmany Cienfuegos, member of the
Central Committee; Mauro Garcia Tirana, head of the Socialist Countries
Department of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs Hector Rodriguez Llompart,
ambassador extraordinary and plenipotentiary of the Republic of Cuban to
the GDR.

In an atmosphere of sincere friendship and mutual understanding, a
comprehensive and thorough exchange of opinions took place on the
experiences of both parties and governments in building the socialist
society and on problems of the international situation.

The delegation of the GDR informed the Cuban guests about the decisions of
the Eighth SED Congress and about the great achievements scored by the
workers class and all working people under the leadership of its
Marxist-Leninist party in shaping the developed socialist society.

The delegation of the Republic of Cuba reported on experiences in building
the socialist social system in its country and the progress achieved in
this process by the Cuban working people under the leadership of the Cuban
Communist Party. Both sides underlined that any success scored by the
Republic of Cuba in socialist construction and the economic transformation
of its country simultaneously constitutes active support for the liberation
struggle of the other people of Latin America as well.

Both delegations noted with satisfaction that the relations of fraternal
friendship and cooperation between the SED and the Cuban Communist Party,
between the government of the GDR and the Revolutionary Government of the
Republic of Cuba, between the peoples of both states are developing
favorably on the basis of the principles of Marxsim-Leninism, socialist
internationalism and the common goals in building the socialist social
system in all spheres of social life. This is expressed in the numerous
interstate treaties and agreements between the social institutions and mass
organizations of both states.

Both sides assessed as extraordinarily useful the exchange of experiences
on the growing role of the workers class and its Marxist-Leninist party in
all spheres of building the socialist society. They reaffirm their
intention to expand and deepen bilateral consultations on questions of
mutual interest and strengthen and universally develop the friendship
between the GDR and the Republic of Cuba over a long period for the benefit
of both parties, states and peoples.

The delegation of the GDR emphasized that the GDR stands in firm solidarity
at the side of socialist Cuba in defending the revolutionary achievements
of the fraternal Cuban people against any attempt by U.S. imperialism and
its accomplices. The GDR supports the Cuban people and government's demand
that the U.S. Guantanamo Naval Station, which is on Cuban territory and is
occupied illegally by the United States be withdrawn unconditionally. The
GDR also strongly condemns the U.S. Government's blockade of socialist Cuba
and all the aggressions and acts of piracy committed against the Cuban
people.

The Cuban delegation reiterated that the Republic of Cuba fully supports
the admission of the GDR into the United Nations and its specialized
agencies as a member with equal rights. It also supports GDR
participation--with equal rights in accordance with the principle of
universality contained in the UN Charter--in conferences, congresses and
international conventions. The Republic of Cuba favors the immediate
establishment of normal relations between the GDR and all states--including
the Federal Republic of Germany, based on international law--as a
contribution to the solution of international problems.

The two delegations fully agreed on the importance for Cuba and the GDR of
the support and collaboration which they receive from the USSR and the
Communist Party of the USSR for the construction of socialism and the
defense of revolutionary conquests in the two countries. This is undeniable
proof of the importance of the USSR's aid in achieving the victory of
socialism and the revolutionary, anti-imperialist, and democratic struggle
on a worldwide scale, Cuba and the GDR reaffirm their willingness to
strengthen and increase the current unbreakable and fraternal ties of
friendship and collaboration with the USSR.

Both sides stressed the importance of strengthening unity with the
international communist movement and supporting it based on the principles
of Marxism-Leninism and proletarian internationalism. They also confirmed
the willingness of the Communist Party of Cuba and the SED of Germany to
continue working toward this goal.

In the talks, both sides agreed that the international balance of forces
continues to grow in favor of socialism and all the anti-imperialist and
democratic forces of the world. They agreed on the importance of
strengthening continuously the unity and cooperation between socialist
states and the role of the world socialist system as a major revolutionary
force in the peoples struggle against imperialism to liberate themselves
from oppression and exploitation and to guarantee lasting pace.

Both delegations expressed appreciation For the USSR's permanent Leninist
policy of peace aimed at stopping and rejecting the aggressive aspirations
of imperialism, stabilizing world peace, imposing the principles of
peaceful coexistence and preventing international matters in dispute from
being solved by a "policy of force" and having them solved instead in the
interests of all of the world's peoples.

The increasing power and coordinated action of the community of socialist
states have become determining facts in world politics. All of this is the
result of the change that has occurred in the balance of forces in the
world in favor of the socialist and anti-imperialist camp.

The delegations of Cuba and the GDR agreed that U.S. imperialism is the
major enemy of the world revolutionary movement, all progressive forces,
and peoples who seek progress and peace.

In discussing the situation in Indochina, the two sides highlighted their
active solidarity with the heroic struggle of the peoples of Vietnam,
Cambodia and Laos, and their opposition to U.S. aggression. The two parties
stressed their firm determination to continue aiding and supporting these
peoples. They strongly condemned the new U.S. adventure in Vietnam, which
is a flagrant violation of international law and a threat to world peace.
The Republic of Cuba and the GDR definitely demand the cessation of the
blockade of DRV ports and coasts, and the criminal bombings against DRV
territory and means of communication, which were decreed by the U.S.
Government in view of the complete failure of its so-called Vietnamization
policy. They demand that all U.S. troops in Indochina withdraw
unconditionally and that support for the Saigon puppet regime be ended.
Both sides condemned the sabotage of the Paris talks by the U.S.
Government, as well as U.S. Government maneuvers to prevent the resumption
of the talks. The two parties expressed their firm support for the DRV's
constructive proposals, which form a reasonable basis for a solution in the
interests of the Indochinese peoples.

Both sides expressed their satisfaction with the process of detente and
cooperation which is developing favorably on the European Continent.

They hail the active struggle of the European peoples and of all
progressive forces for the expansion of good neighbor relations between
themselves and the nations of Europe. Both parties agree that the
principles of European society and cooperation, as enunciated in the Prague
declaration of the Political Consultive Committee of the members of the
Warsaw Pact, are thoroughly valid and indispensable standards for any truly
peaceful coexistence of the European nations.

The two delegations favor the immediate convocation of a conference of
European nations on security and cooperation because the conditions are
ripe for multilateral preparation of such a conference and its successful
materialization. They believe that a guaranteed European security serves
not only the interests of the European nations, but should contribute, at
the same time, to the creation of a solid basis for peace, and for the
security and the safeguarding of the independence of all the nations and
peoples of the world.

Both parties consider the implementation of the treaties between the USSR
and the FRG, as well as between Poland and the FRG as an important step on
the road toward the normalization of the European situation. Peace and
security demand the subsequent recognitional spelled out in these treaties
in obligatory form and according to international law--of the territorial
integrity of all the European nations within their present borders. This
includes both the FRG and the GDR.

Both delegations support the justified demand by the Socialist Republic of
Czechoslovakia that the Munich Agreement be declared null and void from the
day on which it was signed. They also hold that an agreement between
Czechoslovakia and the FRG would be a fundamental factor guaranteeing peace
in Europe. Both parties further emphasized the positive effects on the
normalization of the European situation resulting from a quadrilateral
agreement on West Berlin, the treaties and agreements between the GDR and
the FRG, as well as from the agreement between the GDR and the West Berlin
Senat. The Cuban delegation considers as positive the GDR's constructive
policies which are guided by the desire to actively encourage the expansion
of Europe and to create the bases for the development of normal relations
between the nations on an equal footing and on the basis of international
law.

The two delegations agreed try highly assess the important contribution
made by the peoples of Asia, Africa, and Latin America to the
anti-imperialist struggle throughout the world with their ever increasing
movements of national liberation and social progress. They express their
unshakable solidarity with the struggle of the peoples against imperialism,
colonialism, neocolonialism, and for social liberation and national
independence.

The partners in the discussion stated that they give solidarity support to
the proposals of the DPRK for solving its international problems. They
resolutely demand the withdrawal of the U.S. troops from South Korea and a
halt to imperialist attempts against the DPRK.

Regarding the situation in the Middle East, both delegations clearly
endorsed a just and lasting peace in that region. They emphatically demand
the withdrawal of Israeli troops from the occupied Arab territories and the
recognition of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian Arabs. Both parties
reiterated their firm solidarity with the Arab people's struggle against
Israeli aggression and for social progress, while stating their
determination to continue to develop and strengthen ties of friendship and
cooperation with the progressive Arab states.

As for the current situation in Africa, the two delegations expressed their
support for the national liberation struggle of the people on that
continent and for the new states which are defending their national
interests against an imperialist policy of oppression and aggression. They
therefore support the armed liberation struggle of the people of
Guinea-Bissau, Angola, and Mozanbique against the colonialism of the
Portuguese and their NATO allies.

They condemn the brutal policy of racial discrimination practised by the
Pretoria and Salisbury regimes against the peoples of Zimbawe, South
Africa, and Namibia. They likewise repudiate the aggressive plans of the
colonialist Portuguese and their NATO allies against the republic of Guinea
and other African states.

Regarding Latin America, both parties agreed that the revolutionary
movements there have gathered considerable momentum since the triumph of
the Cuban Revolution, which inspired them by its example. The struggle
against imperialist exploitation and oppression, against international
reactionaries, in favor of national independence, and economic development
and social progress is becoming more intensive and broader as new forces
join it in Combat. This anti-imperialist and democratic movement in the
Latin American countries is greatly contributing to a change in the
international balance of forces in favor of social progress.

The important conquests made by the Chilean progressive forces in their
great efforts to implement the basic anti-imperialist and democratic
program of President Salvador Allende's Popular Unity Government present an
outstanding example of the success of such just struggles by the Latin
American people. Both parties assure the government and the people of Chile
of their full support. They also support the nationalist measures taken by
the Peruvian Government and the struggle of the Panamanian people to
establish full sovereignty over all of their national territory.

Both parties repeat their firm support for the just struggle of all the
Latin American people against the imperialism of the United States and its
allies and local reactionary forces. The two delegations proclaim the
inalienable right of all peoples to rescue for their own use all their
national resources from the hands of the imperialist monopolies, and they
condemn the reprisals and discriminatory measures adopted by the
imperialists against the governments and peoples taking steps to defend
their national resources and sovereignty.

The Cuban delegation expressed its satisfaction over the importance of this
visit which has contributed in an extraordinary way to strengthening the
bonds of friendship and solidarity between the governments and the peoples
of Cuba and the GDR. The Cuban delegation was able to measure the great
revolutionary, anti-imperialist, and internationalist spirit which inspires
the SED, the workers, the cooperative peasants, the soldiers, youths, and
all the people of the GDR. This spirit makes for an unbreakable unity
between the peoples of Cuba and the German Socialist Republic.

The visiting delegation expressed its heartfelt gratitude for the warm
hospitality, affection, and solidarity received everywhere from the
authorities and the people of the GDR. As a result of their joint talks,
marked by a spirit of profound mutual understanding and agreement on
criteria, both parties expressed with great satisfaction and joy that this
friendly and official visit to the GDR by the Cuban delegation, headed by
Comrade Fidel Castro, first secretary of the Communist Party of Cuba and
prime minister of the Cuban Revolutionary Government, has significantly
strengthened the ties of fraternal friendship and sound cooperation between
both fraternal parties, nations, and peoples. At the same time, it will
contribute to the strengthening of the world socialist system as well as to
the unity and cohesion within the world communist and workers movement
based on Marxism-Leninism and proletarian internationalism.

Comrade Fidel Castro invited Comrades Erich Honecker and Willi Stoph to
visit the Republic Of Cuba. This invitation was gratefully accepted, and
the date will be determined soon.

[Signed] Maj Fidel Castro Ruz, first secretary of the Central Committee of
the Communist Party of Cuba and prime minister of the Revolutionary
Government of the Cuban Republic; Erich Honecker, first secretary of the
Central Committee of the Socialist Unity Party of Germany.
-END-


 |

