
Castro Farewell Message

Conakry PRELA [PRENSA LATINA] in Spanish to PRELA Havana 1249 1249 GMT 8
Mar 72 C--FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Text] Conakry, 8 May--Shortly after taking off from Gbessia International
Airport at the end of a 5-day visit to Guinea, Maj Fidel Castro sent a
message to President Sekou Toure and to Prime Minister Lansana Beavogui.
The text of the message sent by the Cuban prime minister to his Guinean
hosts is as follows:

To the president of the Republic of Guinea, comrade Ahmed Sekou Toure. To
the prime minister of he Republic of Guinea, comrade Lansana Beavogui.

Dear comrades; On leaving the Republic of Guinea I would like to express to
you, to the Democratic Party of Guinea, to the government and to all the
Guinean people my most profound gratitude for the sincere and warm welcome
you have extended to our delegation. I would especially like to thank
comrade Ahmed Sekou Toure for--among other considerations he showed for me
personally--having me as a guest in his own home.

This short but fruitful visit has given us the opportunity to gain a first
hand view of revolutionary achievements and of the Guinean people's
indomitable spirit of self- determination, their discipline, their
conscience and their strength. It has allowed us to reaffirm our belief in
the Guinean people's role in the struggle for the total emancipation of the
African Continent. We are convinced that today our people are loyal
followers of the heroic traditions embodied in the Almani Zamoure Toure.
This tradition rejects colonialism and favors the firm stand of 22
November. Flying over your beloved country, I would like to express in the
name of the Cuban delegation and in my own name our most profound emotion
at leaving those who made us feel as one of their own. We also would like
to express our militant solidarity. Sure of our victory in the common
struggle, please receive our fraternal regards. Major Fidel Castro Ruz,
first secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party and Prime
Minister of the Revolutionary Government of Cuba.
-END-


 |

