
ROMANIAN-CUBAN JOINT COMMUNIQUE PUBLISHED

Bucharest SCINTEIA in Romanian 31 May 72 pp 1, 7 A

[Joint Romanian-Cuban communique on Fidel Castro's visit to Romania]

[Text] Comrade Fidel Castro, first secretary of the Central Committee of
the Cuban Communist Party [PCC] and prime minister of the Revolutionary
Government of the Republic of Cuba, paid an official friendship visit to
the Socialist Republic of Romania on 26-30 May 1972 at the invitation of
the RCP Central Committee and the Council of Ministers of the Socialist
Republic of Romania.

Comrade Fidel Castro and the party-government delegation accompanying him
toured industrial agricultural and cultural units in Bucharest, Ploietsi
and Ilfov County, such as the "Brazi" petrochemical complex, the "May 1st"
petroleum equipment plant in Ploiesti, the Fundulea Institute of Research
for Wheat and Industrial Crops, the polytechnical institute and new
dwelling quarters in Bucharest. At the places visited the guests met with
party-state aktivists, representatives of mass organizations, many working
people and citizens.

The representatives of revolutionary Cuba were everywhere received with
particular warmth and pleasure, which expressed the feeling of friendship
and militant solidarity linking the Romanian and Cuban peoples.

During the visit, talks were held between Comrade Nicolae Ceausescu, RCP
secretary general and president of the State Council for the Socialist
Republic of Romania, and Comrade Fidel Castro, first secretary of the PCC
Central Committee and prime minister of the Revolutionary Government of the
Republic of Cuba, attended by:

On the Romanian side: Comrades Ion Gheorghe Mauer, member of the Executive
Committee and Permanent Presidium of the RCP Central Committee and chairman
of the Council of Ministers; Emil Bodnaras, member of the Executive
Committee and Permanent Presidium of the RCP Central Committee and deputy
president of the State Council; Ion Patan, member of the Executive
Committee of the RCP Central Committee, deputy chairman of the Council of
Ministers and minister of foreign trade; Army Gen Ion Ionita, alternate
member of the executive Committee of the RCP Central Committee and minister
of the armed forces; Bujor Almasan, member of the RCP Central Committee and
minister of mining, petroleum and geology; Theodor Marinescu, member of the
RCP Central Committee and chief of the Foreign Relations Section of the RCP
Central Committee; George Macovescu, member of the RCP Central Committee
and first deputy minister of foreign affairs; Gheorghe Oprea, alternate
member of the RCP Central Committee and counselor at the RCP Central
Committee, and Petre Ionescu, alternative member of the RCP Central
Committee and ambassador of the Socialist Republic of Romania to the
Republic of Cuba.

On the Cuban side: Comrades Dr Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, member of the
Secretariat on the PCC Central Committee and minister of the revolutionary
government; Maj Flavio Bravo, member of the PCC Central Committee; Jose A.
Naranjo, member of the PCC Central Committee and minister of the food
industry; Maj Arnaldo Ochoa, member of the PCC Central Committee and chief
of the Havana army, Osmany Cienfuegos, member of the PCC Central Committee;
Mauro Garcia, director of the Department of Socialist Countries at the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and Nicolas Rodriguez, ambassador of the
Republic of Cuba to the Socialist Republic of Romania.

During the talks the delegation informed each other on the activity of
their parties and governments for developing socialist construction in both
countries. The sides noted that the Socialist Republic of Romania and the
Republic of Cuba have achieved remarkable successes in the construction of
a new society. Also discussed were problems concerning the development of
bilateral relations of fraternal friendship and cooperation, as well as
some problems of the current international situation and of the communist
workers movement and national liberation.

The Romanian side highly appreciated the devoted and heroic work of the
Cuban people, led by the communist party, for building a socialist society
and for consolidating their revolutionary conquests against the aggressive
plots of U.S. imperialism. The Romanian people, who enthusiastically hailed
the triumph of the revolution in Cuba, wholeheartedly rejoice in the
remarkable achievements attained by the Cuban working people in the complex
work of developing and diversifying their national economy and in
accomplishing far-reaching changes in the entire political, social and
cultural life of the country.

The triumph of the revolution in fraternal Cuba crowned the long struggle
staged by the Cuban people for national and social liberation; it was a
historical moment in the international revolutionary process and an
inspiring example in the peoples' struggle for freedom, democracy and
social progress.

The Cuban side expressed the determination to continue with the
construction of the first socialist state in the Americas, despite the U.S.
imperialist government's threat in direct aggression and economic blockade,
and reiterated the request of the Cuban Government and people regarding the
unconditioned withdrawal of the North American navy base from Guantanamo.

The Romanian side hails the strengthening of Cuba's position on an
international plane, is in complete solidarity with its struggle for
defending the country's independence and sovereignty, and firmly supports
the legitimate request of the Republic of Cuba concerning the withdrawal of
the North American navy base from Guantannamo.

The Cuban side highly appreciated the heroic struggle of the Romanian
workers class and people, led by the communist party, in the victorious
armed insurrection which overthrew the fascist rule for a revolutionary
change in the entire society and for building a new system. The Cuban
delegation expressed its pleasure at the remarkable achievements of the
Romanian workers class, peasantry, and intelligentsia in building a modern
industry, in continuously developing agriculture, in developing science and
culture and in improving the working people's standard of living.

The party-government delegation of the Republic of Cuba hailed the
remarkable successes of the Romanian people in implementing the 10th RCP
Congress program for the construction of a comprehensively developed
socialist society in Romania.

The Cuban people, the communist party and the Revolutionary Government of
the Republic of Cuba, stressing the comradely cooperation between the two
socialist states, expressed their gratitude for the fraternal support of
the Romanian people, the communist party and the Government of the
Socialist Republic of Romania.

Both sides highly highlighted with particular satisfaction that the
relations of fraternal friendship, comradely assistance and many sided
cooperation between the RCP and the PCC, between Romania and Cuba, are
successfully developing based on the principles of Marxism-Lenninism and
internationalist solidarity, in the spirit of both peoples and the cause of
socialism, freedom and progress. They stressed that the meetings and talks
held between party-state representatives, the expansion of exchange of
experience in various fields of activity, the development and
diversification of ties among institutions and organizations in the two
countries, as well as cooperation on an international plane, are
particularly significant for the development of Romanian-Cuban relations.

Both sides stressed the increasing development of economic relations, the
notable increase and diversification of trade exchanges, and the expansion
of industrial cooperation in production in keeping with the cooperation
agreement concluded in April 1969. The sides agreed on the need to better
utilize the increased possibilities offered by the continuously developing
national economies of the two countries. With this view, the mixed
government commission of economic and scientific-technical cooperation,
whose activity was praised, the ministries and other central bodies in the
two countries were entrusted to establish concrete measures for deepening
cooperation in production, science and technology, especially in the fields
of mining, chemical industry, construction materials, transports and animal
husbandry. The sides agreed to conclude soon a new long-term trade and
payments agreement which would lead in coming years to a substantial growth
of trade between the two countries.

The two sides highlighted the results obtained in fulfilling existing
agreements concerning the development of relations in the fields of
culture, art, press and education, in the fruitful cooperation in training
technical cadres, and stressed the mutual desire to further expand this
cooperation.

The Socialist Republic of Romania and the Republic of Cuba pay special
attention to the development of relations of friendship, cooperation and
fraternal solidarity with all socialist countries, believing this to be in
keeping with the interests of both the Romanian and Cuban peoples and with
the cause of strengthening the international socialist system--a decisive
factor in the struggle against imperialism, colonialism and neocolonialism.

During the talks, both sides stressed the deep significance of the shift of
the international balance of forces toward the stringer international
positions of the socialist countries, and revolutionary, democratic and
progressive forces, a fact which creates favorable conditions for
intensifying the struggle against the imperialist policy of aggression and
interference in the internal affairs of other countries, for national and
social liberation.

The two delegations emphasized the particular importance of the movement
for national and social liberation of oppressed peoples in Asia, Africa and
Latin America, viewing this as a remarkable contribution to the cause of
the revolution throughout the world, against capitalism and imperialism.

On analyzing the situation in Indochina, the sides hailed the important
successes obtained by the South Vietnamese patriotic forces in the current
offensive against the imperialist intervention, which is determining the
failure of the policy of "Vietnamization."

At the same time, they firmly condemned the U.S. blockade of ports and the
intensification of bombings of transportation systems and towns in the DRV.
These new aggressive acts are dangerously escalating the war in Indochina,
which is a flagrant violation of international law and a grave threat to
international security and peace.

Reasserting their complete solidarity with the heroic struggle of the
Vietnamese people for defending their national freedom and independence,
the Socialist Republic of Romania and the Republic of Cuba express their
determination to further extend their full support. They firmly request the
cessation of all military actions against the DRV and the Vietnamese
people, and speak out for immediate resumption of the Paris negotiations,
for the complete withdrawal of U.S. troops from Indochina, and for ending
assistance to the Thieu puppet government; they support the DRV proposals
and the PRGRSV seven-point program, which provides a logical basis for
solving the conflict.

The two delegations expressed their solidarity with the legitimate demands
of the Cambodian Royal Government of National Unity and of the Lau
Patriotic Front concerning the cessation of the U.S. imperialist
aggression; the Vietnamese, Cambodian and Lao peoples must be left to
independently decide their destinies without any foreign interference.

Both sides support the struggle of the Korean people for the withdrawal of
the U.S. troops from South Korea; they support the DPRK proposals
concerning the independent and peaceful reunification of the fatherland.

Both sides stressed with satisfaction that the movement of national
liberation of Latin American peoples has become a powerful force. The ever
deeper penetration of North American imperialism in all fields of the
economic, political and cultural activities in these countries determines a
sharpening of economic and social contradictions and an intensification of
the Latin American peoples' revolutionary struggle against imperialism.
Within this revolutionary upsurge, the social basis of the anti-imperialist
movement is expanding; new political forces and social strata are adhering
to it, and the socialist ideas gain influence with increasingly large
masses.

Both sides express their solidarity with the Chilean Government of Popular
Unity chaired by Salvador Allende, sympathize with the measures taken by
the Peruvian Government for defending its national interests, and with the
aspirations of the people in Panama for fully exercising their sovereignty
and independence throughout their entire territory. They support measures
directed toward regaining the Latin American countries' natural resources,
and are in solidarity with the peoples of this continent in their struggle
for freedom, social justice and a better future.

The delegations presented their stands on the Middle East situation. They
stressed that any solution of the Israeli-Arab conflict will have to take
into account the legitimate and inalienable rights and aspirations of the
Palestinian population.

During the exchange of views on the situation in Europe, both sides hailed
the improvement of the political climate on the continent, to which the
socialist countries have made a remarkable contribution, and at the same
time highlighted the importance of recognizing the present state borders on
the continent for the maintenance of peace in the world.

Both sides positively appraise the ratification of the FRG treaties with
the USSR and the People's Republic of Poland, the quadripartite agreement
on Berlin, and the negotiations between the GDR and the FRG and the West
Berlin Senate, viewing them as a considerable contribution to eliminating
any remnants of the past world war. The Romanian and Cuban delegations
speak out for the recognition of the GDR--a sovereign socialist state--by
all states, on the basis of international law, and for its equal
participation in international activities. At the same time, Romania and
Cuba support the concurrent admission of both German states to the United
Nations.

The Socialist Republic of Romania and the Republic of Cuba believe that
favorable conditions exist at present for holding many-sided preparatory
proceedings and for convening the European conference for security and
cooperation in the near future.

The Republic of Cuba highly appreciates the Socialist Republic of Romania's
consistent activity for establishing a lasting security system in Europe,
for turning the Balkans into an area of peace, cooperation and good
neighborliness, an activity which contributes to international detente.

Both countries firmly support the right of underdeveloped peoples to regain
their national riches and to freely benefit from contemporary science and
technology; they speak out against imperialist methods of economic
reprisals and discrimination against countries and peoples who defend their
legitimate rights.

Expressing their deep adhesion to the inalienable right of all peoples to a
free and independent life, the two sides reasserted their militant
solidarity with the struggle of liberation movements and of young African
states against imperialism colonialism and neocolonialism. The socialist
Republic of Romania and the Republic of Cuba will further fully support the
armed struggle of the peoples in Guinea- Bissau, Angola and Mozambique, as
well as in other independent territories, for eliminating the colonialist
oppression and for winning their national independence, for achieving their
legitimate aspirations for freedom and social progress. They condemn the
policy of racial discrimination promoted by the governments in Pretoria and
Salisbury against the peoples in South Africa, Namibia and Zimbabwe.

Both sides stressed that all states should actively participate in the
solution of vital international problems.

The delegations consistently speak out for general and complete
disarmament, under struct international control, and support the convening
of an international conference devoted to the discussion and analysis of
disarmament problems, with the participation of all states.

During the talks, the delegations agreed to strengthen and deepen relations
between the Socialist Republic of Romania and the Republic of Cuba in all
fields, based on respect for national sovereignty and independence,
noninterference in internal affairs and mutual advantage. At the same time,
Comrade Nicolae Ceausescu, RCP secretary general, and Comrade Fidel Castro,
first secretary of the PCC Central Committee, expressed the joint
determination of both parties to further deepen and intensify the ties
between the two parties, on the basis of Marxism-Leninism, socialist
internationalism and mutual trust and esteem. Along these lines, the sides
confirmed the RCP and PCC decision to expand their bilateral cooperation
and exchange of experience and information on socialist construction,
through mutual visits, meetings at various levels and consultations on
problems of common interest.

The RCP and the PCC express their determination to untiringly act for
expanding the relations of internationalist solidarity with all communist
and workers movements, with movements of national liberation and with
democratic and progressive forces, with the view to achieving a unity of
action of all revolutionary and progressive forces in their struggle
against imperialism, colonialism and necolonialism, for national freedom
and social justice and for peace throughout the world.

Both sides believe that the official visit to the Socialist Republic of
Romania of Comrade Fidel Castro, first secretary of the PCC Central
Committee and prime minister of the Revolutionary Government of the
Republic of Cuba, and the fruitful talks held in a comradely atmosphere of
mutual esteem and understanding, make a valuable contribution to
strengthening and further developing the fraternal relations between the
RCP and PCC of the many-sided cooperation between the Socialist Republic of
Romania and the Republic of Cuba, in the interest of both peoples and the
cause of the unity of all socialist states and of all revolutionary and
anti-imperialist forces in the world.

Comrade Fidel Castro, on behalf of the PCC Central Committee and the Cuban
Revolutionary Government, invited Comrade Nicolae Ceausescu, RCP secretary
general and president of the State Council of the Socialist Republic of
Romania, to pay an official visit of friendship to the Republic of Cuba.
The invitation was accepted with pleasure; the date of the visit will be
set later.
-END-


 |

