
Castro Remarks at Godollo

Budapest Domestic Service in Hungarian 1100 GMT 5 Jun 72 L

[Speech by Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro at 5 June students meeting at
the University of Agricultural Sciences at Godollo--in Spanish fading into
translation-- recorded]

[Text] Dear friends: I would like to begin by saying that the
responsibility for what I am about to say here is not mine. It is the
translator's.

We feel it is a privilege to have been born in a revolutionary era. This is
your privilege. If we were asked where a revolution must be made, I would
say not in Hungary. The revolution has already taken place in Hungary.

The young generations of Hungary, Cuba, the Soviet Union, Bulgaria, of the
countries which have already made the social revolution and which are
working to develop and consolidate the economy, to develop an advanced
socialist society, are surrounded by a world in which there is still much
poverty, much misery and much exploitation. We refer to the peoples of
Latin America, Africa, thousands and thousands of human beings who live in
technical backwardness and in conditions of economic under- development. A
powerful empire is engaged in preventing these countries from becoming
independent. A powerful empire is engaged in preventing Cuba and the Latin
American peoples from being independent and is engaged in preventing other
peoples from acquiring independence. You are growing up in this world. You
must not just think of the Hungarian world. You must not just think of the
world near you. You must think in international terms, in terms of the
great human family.

Therefore no one must regret not having been born in another age. No one
must regret the fact that he was too young in the old days. Those who want
to be revolutionaries, those who want to give significance to their lives,
those who want to make something worthwhile of their lives, have the
challenge of the present and the future.

Therefore, it is a privilege to have been born in this revolutionary era,
even though one was born in a country where the social revolution has
already taken place.

This is all we want to say to you this morning. We wish you success.
[applause]
-END-


 |

