
Castro Meets With Bulgarians

Havana in Spanish in the Americas 1600 GMT 1 May 72 C

[Text] Maj Fidel Castro, first secretary of the Communist Party of Cuba and
prime minister of the Revolutionary Government, has met with Bulgarian
technicians and specialists working in our country. The meeting, held at
the theatre of the Communications Ministry in Havana, was organized by the
Bulgarian Embassy in Cuba.

Maj Fidel Castro said that the meeting was special, and above all sincere,
spontaneous and friendly. Fidel said: You have taught us things about the
Bulgarian revolution that we would not have learned otherwise. In Cuba you
have stood for the best of your country and you have taught us what, in our
opinion, should be the exemplary revolutionary technician. He added: This
view I express also applies to the technicians from the other socialist
countries, particularly the Soviet specialists who have worked in Cuba
these past years.

Further, the Cuban prime minister said: The decade-long work of
approximately 3,000 Bulgarian technicians and specialists is a very strong
foundation for strengthening a friendship such as the one that has emerged
between Cuba and Bulgaria. Fidel pointed out: Together we have lived the
experience of working, struggling, creating work and a new life. Thanks to
your work, a very beautiful valuable and exemplary thing has been created,
a moral treasure.

Fidel said: With our date of departure so near, we have nostalgically
(?inspected) the projects here at the dams, the bridges and the roads. But
there is something to compensate for this nostalgia--knowing that you are
here working, knowing that when we arrive in Bulgaria, we will feel as if
we were in our own fatherland.

Angel Budev, the Bulgarian ambassador in Cuba, made a speech to salute the
Cuban prime minister and the delegation that will accompany him to
Bulgaria. Later on, a Bulgarian technician. Kaycho Boyadyiev, read a letter
expressing the most heartfelt sentiments of solidarity from the Bulgarian
personnel working in Cuba and saluting the upcoming tour of the Cuban
delegation headed by Fidel.

Also present at the meeting were Maj Ramiro Valdes, a member of the
Political Bureau of the Communist Party of Cuba, and Jesus Montane from the
Secretariat of Organization.
-END-


 |

