
CUBAN PREMIER CASTRO VISITS WEST BERLIN BORDER

Inscribes Guest Book

East Berlin ADN International Service in German 2029 GMT 14 Jun 72 L

[Text] Berlin--ON Wednesday, the second day of its official visit to the
GDR, the Cuban party and government delegation led by Fidel Castro visited
the state border with West Berlin. The eminent guests were accompanied by
SED Politburo member Werner Lamberz, State Security Minister Erich Mielke,
Deputy Defense Minister Col. Gen. Heinz Kessler, and other leading
officials of the GDR.

The first secretary of the Cuban Communist Party Central Committee, Premier
Fidel Castro, wrote the following lines in the guest book of the city
commandant of the GDR capital:

"One can take note here of the extraordinary difficulties created by
imperialism around and in the heart of the GDR. Yet one also notices the
outstanding merits of the revolutionary people of this country in the
overcoming of these difficulties which were of a dimension hard to imagine.
Nearby one can notice the relics of the former symbols of fascism,
reaction, and imperialism, the defenders and ideological successors of
which are endeavoring in vain to revive them."

The entry continues: "It is also clearly evident that the GDR will still
have to wage a hard struggle in its defense against provocations and
subversive actions of imperialism, against propaganda and dastardly lies
which are spread all the time. Yet there is no doubt that it will emerge
victorious form this struggle and that no one and nothing will be able to
prevent the new generations now raised here and the people form having a
creative and peaceful future.

"The new generation, as I said, is being raised in the spirit of the
glorious and invincible ideas of solidarity and internationalism. Our
fraternal and cordial greetings are extended to the brave and selfless
border troops of the GDR's National People's Army, standing guard here in
the first line of defense of their fatherland and the whole socialist
community."
-END-


 |

