
CASTRO ADDRESSED GDR HOSTS ON VISIT TO BERLIN

Moscow TASS International Service in English 1805 GMT 14 Jun 72 L

[Text] Berlin June 14 TASS--The party and government delegations of the GDR
and the Republic of Cuba started talks in Berlin. The GDR delegation is led
by First Secretary of the Socialist Unity Party of Germany Central
Committee Erich Honecker. The Cuban delegation--by First Secretary of the
Communist Party of Cuba Central Committee, Prime Minister of the
Revolutionary Government Fidel Castro.

The participants in the talks taking part in which apart from the heads of
the delegations are member of the Political Bureau of the Socialist Unity
Party of Germany Central Committee, Chairman of the Council of State of the
GDR Walter Ulbricht, member of the Political Bureau of the Socialist Unity
Party of Germany Central Committee, Chairman of the GDR Council of
Ministers Willi Stoph, members of the Political Bureau of the Socialist
Unity Party of Germany Central Committee Hermann Axen and Werner Lamberz,
GDR Foreign Minister Otto Winzer, and member of the Secretariat of the
Communist Party of Cuba Central Committee, Minister of the Revolutionary
Government of the Republic of Cuba, C.R. Rodriguez and other members of the
Cuban delegation exchanged views on the questions of construction of
socialism, relations between the parties and governments of both countries
and international issues.

Erich Honecker and Willi Stoph held a reception in honor of Fidel Castro.

Fraternal relations of close friendship and cooperation had been
established between the Socialist Unity Party of Germany and the Communist
Party of Cuba, between the peoples and states of the GDR and the Republic
of Cuba. We [not further identified] are united by the common principles of
Marxism-Leninism and proletarian internationalism, common goals in the
construction of socialism, the common fraternal alliance with the Soviet
Union and other states of the socialist community, common goals in the
struggle for peace and freedom of peoples, against imperialist aggression.

"We are aware of the greatness and importance of international solidarity
and support from the Soviet Union and the entire socialist community",
Fidel Castro said in a reply speech. The Republic of Cuba, he said, will
further strengthen the links of friendship with the GDR, the Soviet Union,
and the other socialist countries.

Fidel Castro described the efforts of the Soviet Union, the GDR and the
other countries of the socialist community in the restoration of economy
and industry destroyed during the years of the war, in the strengthening of
socialist camp as an unparalleled feat in mankind's history. Pointing to
the growth of the forces of socialism, Castro said that at present there is
a strong socialist state--the Republic of Cuba with a people of high
revolutionary consciousness in direct proximity to the USA.

F. Castro said that he shares and welcomes the stand of the GDR towards the
fraternal people of Vietnam waging a difficult struggle against the U.S.
aggression. The heroic people of Vietnam, F. Castro stressed, have the
support of the entire international revolutionary movement. In conclusion
F. Castro expressed confidence that the visit of Cuban party and government
delegation will contribute to the further deepening of relations between
the Republic of Cuba and the GDR, friendship of the peoples of the two
countries.
-END-


 |

