
Report on Communique

Belgrade TANJUG in English 2100 GMT 27 Jun 73 L

[Text] Havana, June 27/TANJUG/--A joint communique was issued today on
talks held here from June 21 to 27 by a delegation of the League of
Communist of Yugoslavia /LCY/, headed by secretary of the Executive Bureau
of the Presidency of the LCY Stane Dolanc, with highest representatives of
the Communist Party of Cuba.

During the visit paid to Cuba by the LCY delegation, Stane Dolanc and other
members of the delegation, the president of the League of Communists of
Macedonia, Angel Cemerski, and the deputy secretary of the Executive
Committee of the League of Communists of Croatia, Dusan Dragosavac, had a
friendly meeting with the first secretary of the Central Committee of the
Communist Party of Cuba, Fidel Castro. On this occasion, it is noted in the
communique, Stane Dolanc conveyed to Fidel Castro a message from President
Tito and his invitation for the Cuban leader to visit Yugoslavia, which was
accepted with pleasure.

The LCY delegation also met with other leading personages of the Communist
Party of Cuba.

During the official talks between representatives of the League of
Communist of Yugoslavia and the Communist Party of Cuba, opinions were
exchange on the international problems of interest to the two parties, the
communique says. The two delegations informed each other about the
situation in Yugoslavia and Cuba respectively, "noting the need for further
consultations, exchange of opinions and information about questions of
interest." To this end, the delegation of the LCY invited a delegation of
the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Cuba to visit Yugoslavia.
The invitation was accepted.

The delegation of the LCY also toured the provinces of Havana and Matanzas
and was able to get acquainted with some of the basic tasks of the
construction of socialism in Cuba concerning especially the development of
crop farming, livestock raising, housing and plans in education.

The delegation of the LCY, the communique says, "stressed the marked
results achieved by Cuba in these fields and thanked for the warm reception
accorded to it in Cuba."
-END-


 |

