
MOSCOW TRANSMITS DETAILS ON CONCLUSION OF TALKS IN CUBA

Moscow Domestic Service in Russian 0700 GMT 3 Feb 74 L

[Text] As we have already reported, Soviet-Cuban talks were completed in
Havana on 2 February. We are transmitting a detailed report on the
completion of the talks, which we received from TASS today:

The completion of the Soviet-Cuban talks:

A meeting between Leonid Brezhnev, general secretary of the CPSU Central
Committee and the Soviet comrades who arrived with him and Fidel Castro,
first secretary of the Central Committee of the Cuban Communist Party and
prime minister of the Revolutionary Government of the Republic of Cuba, and
members of the Polithuro and Secretariat of the Central Committee of the
Communist Party of Cuba took place on the afternoon of 2 February.

In the talks which took place, Comrade Fidel Castro spoke the activity of
the Cuban Communist Party and of its preparation for its first congress. He
stressed: The prestige of the party is growing, and its ties with the
masses are gaining strength. Comrade Castro also spoke about some questions
concerning development of the state in Cuba and of the activity of the mass
organizations. He noted: The party is devoting great attention to the
development of planned economy, to the preparation for the first 5-year
plan for development of the national economy of the republic.

Fidel Castro spoke of the favorable development of foreign economic ties of
Cuba, particularly with the socialist countries He noted the strengthening
of Cuba's international prestige, including its role in the movement of the
nonalined countries. Castro said: The position of the Cuban revolution is
very stable. As never before the Cuban people are rallied around their
communist party.

Comrade Castro stressed the exceptionally close and fraternal relations
between Cuba and the Soviet Union, between the CPSU and the Communist Party
of Cuba. The Soviet Union can always count on the friendship and solidarity
on' the part of Cuba, Comrade Fidel Castro Said. The people of Cuba are
true friends and brothers of the Soviet people. The relations between the
CPSU and the Communist Party of Cuba are relations of fraternal friendship
and true genuine solidarity based on socialist internationalism. Castro
said: We shall do everything to be worthy of this friendship. Castro
thanked Leonid Ilich Brezhnev for his visit to Cuba. Castro said: This is
for us a historic visit, and it was crowned with complete success in all
respects. Soviet-Cuban relations have received a fresh and powerful impetus
for development.

Fidel Castro said: Comrade Brezhnev aroused unusually friendly feelings for
himself among our people. The visit has raised to unsurpassed heights the
relations between our parties, between our peoples. Fidel Castro stressed:
This is our assessment.

Comrade Brezhnev cordially thanked Fidel Castro and the entire leadership
of the Cuban Communist Party for the invitation. He noted the great
significance of the visit and of the Soviet-Cuban talks that took place for
the further strengthening of relations between the Soviet Union and Cuba.

The reception accorded in Cuba to the representatives or the party of Lenin
eloquently speaks of the fraternal feelings of the Cuban people toward the
Soviet Union. Leonid Ilich Brezhnev noted the enormous organizing role of
the Communist Party of Cuba in the life of the Cuban people, in insuring
the happy future of free Cuba. Therein lies the great merit of Comrade
Fidel Castro personally,

Comrade Brezhnev wished the forthcoming First Congress of the Communist
Party of Cuba success and expresses his Confidence that the congress would
initiate a new and glorious stage in the history of socialist Cuba. The
Communist Party of Cuba, Leonid Ilich Brezhnev stressed, is a truly
Marxist-Leninist party, a truly internationalist party, and that is why it
has been able to win such great authority in the international Communist
movement. Therein lies the great merit of the Central Committee of the
Communist Party of Cuba. The Soviet Union, our country's communists--I can
say this in all confidence are the true friends of the Cuban People, the
true friends of the Cuban revolution. To friendship we respond with
friendship, to loyalty with loyalty.

Our talks and the entire course of of visit, Leonid Ilich Brezhnev went on
to say, has shown the whole world our unity based on the Leninist
Principles of internationalism. The extensive favorable response in many
countries of the world indicates the international significance of our
fraternal meeting in Cuba.

Comrade Brezhnev Conveyed to Comrade Fidel Castro and the other members of
the leadership of the Communist Party of Cuba cordial greetings also From
Comrades Nikolay Viktorovich Podgornyy, Aleksey Nikolayevich Kosygin and
the other members of the Politburo and the secretaries of the CPSU Central
Committee.

The talks proceeded in a cordial and comradely atmosphere, in a spirit of
complete unanimity and socialist solidarity.

Taking part on the Soviet side were member of the CPSU Central Committee
Politburo and USSR Minister of Foreign Affairs Gromyko; member of the CPSU
Central Committee Politburo and First Secretary of the Central Committee of
the Communist Party of the Ukraine Shcherbitskiy; candidate member of the
CPSU Central Committee Politburo and First Secretary of the Leningrad
Oblast CPSU Committee Romanov; Secretary of the CPSU Central Committee
Katushev; member of the CPSU Central Committee and Minister of Civil
Aviation Bugayev; First Deputy Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers
State Committee for Foreign Economic Relations Arkhipov; member of the CPSU
Central Committee and USSR Ambassador to the Republic of Cuba Tolubeyev;
member of the CPSU Central Committee and assistant to the general secretary
of the CPSU Central Committed Rusakov; member of the CPSU Central Auditing
Commission and assistant to the general Secretary of the CPSU Central
Committee Aleksandrov; assistant to the general Secretary of the CPSU
Central Committee Blatov; and member of the CPSU Central Auditing
Commission and general director of TASS Zamyatin.

On the Cuban Side: Members of the Polithuro, Second Secretary of the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of Cuba Raul Castro; President of
the Republic Osvaldo Dorticos; Ramiro Valdes, Armando Hart, Guillermo
Garcia and Sergion del Velieo; members of the Central Committee Secretariat
Blas Roca and Carlos Rafael Rodriguez; member of the Central Committee and
Minister of Foreign Affairs Raul Roa; member of the Central Committed and
Director of the Cuban Civil Aeronautics Institute Jose Alvarez Bravo;
member of the Central Committee and Ambassador of the Republic of Cuba to
the USSR Severo Aguirre; members of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of Cuba Montana and Cienfuegos; and Vice President of the National
Commission on Economic, Scientific and Technical Collaboration Hector
Rodriguez Llompart.
-END-


 |

