
FIDEL CASTRO HAILS LIGHT INDUSTRY ACCOMPLISHMENTS

Havana GRANMA WEEKLY REVIEW in English 23 Mar 75 p 1

[Text] Commander in Chief Fidel Castro, First Secretary of the Communist
Party of Cuba and Prime Minister of the Revolutionary Government, on 12
March presided over the closing session of the annual checkup meeting of
the Ministry of the Light Industry (MINIL) for 1974 and congratulated the
workers for their successful production output over the past year.

"We would like to tell you," said Fidel, "that we're convinced that you,
workers of the light industry, will respond to the tasks included in the
forthcoming five-year plan. Your contribution during the next five years is
of decisive importance. We know that the Revolution has in you an
experienced, enthusiastic, militant and strong force to meet the challenge
of the new tasks. We are fully convinced that you will be a vanguard
industry, that the Revolution and the Party can put their trust in you. We
sincerely congratulate you and wish you similar successes in the future."

The 1974 annual checkup meeting of MINIL was held at the Lazaro Pena
Theater, of the Central Organization of Cuban Trade Unions (CTC), and
lasted all day on 12 March. Flavio Bravo Deputy Prime Minister in charge of
the consumer goods and domestic trade sector and member of the Central
Committee of the Party, gave the closing speech.

The meeting included a detailed report on the 1974 work of MINIL, the
announcement of outstanding factories, dependencies and workers, and the
challenge of MINIL to the Ministry of the Food Industry (MINAL) to
participate in the 1975 emulation just like that of the national
trade-union workers of the two branches. Jose A. Naranjo, Minister of
MINAL, accepted the challenge on behalf of the workers of this ministry.

The annual checkup meeting of MINIL was presided over during the day
sessions by Commander in Chief Fidel Castro; Pedro Miret, member of the
Secretariat of the Central Committee of the Party; Flavio Bravo; Belarmino
Castilla, Deputy Prime Minister in charge of the education, science and
culture sector; Nora Frometa, Minister of MINIL; Pedro Gonalez, general
secretary of the National Trade Union of the Light Industry (SINTIL); Jose
A. Naranjo, Minister of MINAL; Serafin Fernandez, Minister of Domestic
Trade; and Cristobal Ramos, head of the Consumer and Services Department of
the Central Committee. Also on the presiding table were Tania Castellanos,
widow of Lazaro Pena; Rosario Fernandez, member of the CTC's Executive
Secretariat; the executive of SINTIL; heads of MINIL's national office,
directors of enterprises, provincial delegates and other officials of this
ministry.
-END-


 |

