
CASTRO RESPONSE TO 'CONTADORA GROUP' APPEAL NOTED

LD261113 Moscow TASS in English 1055 GMT 26 Jul 83

[Text] Caracas July 26 TASS -- A reply message of Fidel Castro, first
secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Cuba and
chairman of the State Council and the Council of Ministers of Cuba to the
appeal of the presidents of Mexico, Panama, Colombia, and Venezuela, making
up the "Contadora Group," to contribute to a search for a peaceful
settlement of the crisis situation in Central America, has been released
here.

The message says that Cuba shares in full the concern of the "Contadora
Group" over the escalation of conflicts in Central America and advocates
agreements which would ensure peace in the region. We sincerely wish
dialogue instead of confrontation and wholeheartedly support those who
point out the urgent need to initiative bilateral and regional talks to
settle conflicts, Fidel Castro says.

You can wholly count on our support in the achievement of solutions to
problems through talks based on respect for the principle of
non-interference, the right to self- determination, the sovereign equality
of states, cooperation for economic and social development, and peaceful
settlement of disputes.

Cuba principled stand has been approved by Javier Perez de Cuellar, UN
Secretary General, and a number of Latin American statesmen attending
Caracas on the occasion of celebrations of the bicentennial of the birth of
Simon Bolivar, a great fighter for the freedom and independence of the
Latin American peoples. The UN Secretary General said, in particular, that
Fidel Castro's reply demonstrated Cuba's desire to make a contribution to
the common efforts aimed at achieving peace in the region.

Colombian President Belisario Bentancur characterized it as "a very
constructive, useful, and encouraging document." Venezuelan President Luis
Herrera Campins stressed that Cuba's position was a contribution to the
efforts of the "Contadora Group" aimed at removing tensions from the region
and achieving peace. The Latin American peoples, Bolivian President Hernan
Siles Zuazo said, fully share Cuba's desire to have a lasting peace
established in Central America.

It is pointed out by politicians here that President Reagan has not yet
replied to the appeal of the "Contadora Group," although it is the
Washington Administration that is fully responsible for the aggravation of
the situation in Central America.
-END-


 |

