
CASTRO, PCF'S MARCHAIS ISSUE DECLARATION

PA040325 Paris AFP in Spanish 0229 GMT 4 Jan 84

[Text] Havana, 3 Dec (AFP) -- Cuban President Fidel Castro and Georges
Marchais, secretary general of the French Communist Party [PCF], believe
that the situation in Central America is characterized by "the development
of the liberation movement of the peoples" and by "the U.S.' determination
to oppose through any means, including armed intervention, any emancipation
movement."

In a seven-page joint declaration published last night in Havana, 24 hours
[times as received] before the French communist leader returned to his
country, Marchais and Castro affirmed that "Reagan's desire to maintain his
control over such a sensitive region heightens tension and intensifies
conflicts." The example of the invasion of Grenada demonstrates, according
to Castro and Marchais, "the essence of the policy of force that the United
States seeks to impose in the region."

Nonetheless, according to the communist leaders, "despite the broad
deployment of military and economic resources and the diverse political
maneuvers undertaken, the U.S. Government has not achieved its objective in
Central America." "The Nicaraguan revolution has been consolidated," they
note, and in El Salvador "the dictatorship that is maintained thanks only
to U.S. massive support, is facing the push of the threats that hover over
it," the statement reads.

Recalling "the crimes and genocide" caused by "the imperialist negativism
against the national and social liberation," the two parties "denounce the
large Western information media's selective view of the defense of human
rights."

Finally, Castro and Marchais state "that in installing new nuclear weapons
in Western Europe, the United States has taken the grave responsibility of
a new escalation in the arms buildup that threatens the peace and security
of all the peoples of the world." Both parties "come out for an immediate
end to this escalation, for a negotiated and balanced reduction of arms,
and respect for the security of each country."

Marchais returned to his country today after a 10-day visit at the
invitation of Cuban President Castro. Although the Western press was not
informed of his activities, it was learned that the French communist leader
spent most of his stay at Varadero Beach, 120 km east of Havana. He was
accompanied by Maxime Gremetz, secretary of the PCF Central Committee, and
their wives.
-END-


 |

