
Because of all this, the Council of State considers that to grant the
honorary title of Hero of the Republic of Cuba and the Order of Maximo
Gomez to Comrade Colome Ibarra on the occasion of the 25th anniversary of
the triumph of the Cuban revolution constitutes a well-deserved recognition
of his merits and an incentive to all fighters, cadres, revolutionary
militants, and our people who see in their most self-denying and courageous
sons s synthesis of their own virtues: honesty, unselfishness, spirit of
sacrifice, purity, the desire to excel, and heroism.

2. To take the necessary steps to present Colome Ibarra with the Gold Star,
which represents the title of Hero of the Republic of Cuba, and with the
insignia, which represents the Order of Maximo Gomez, at a solemn ceremony.

Issued at the Palace of the Revolution in Havana on 1 January 1984.
[applause]

Resolution No 251

FL031743 Havana Television Service in Spanish 1315 GMT 3 Jan 84

[Resolution No 241 issued by the Cuban Council of State on 1 January 1984,
read by Commander in Chief Fidel Castro Ruz, first secretary of the party
Central Committee and president of the Councils of State and Ministers at
the former municipal town hall in Santiago de Cuba; no date given --
recorded]

[Text] The Council of State of the Republic of Cuba, by the powers vested
in it, and at the request of its president, has approved the following
Resolution No 251:

1. To grant the honorary title of Hero of the Republic of Cuba and the
Order of Maximo Gomez to Division General Arnaldo Ochoa Sanchez in
recognition of his extraordinary merits in the insurrectional struggle
against the tyranny and the imperialist neocolonial nomination, the
struggle for the consolidation and defense of the socialist state, and the
accomplishment of heroic internationalist missions.

Of humble peasant origin, Comrade Ochoa Sanchez, as a teenager rebelled
against in the tyranny in the Cauto plains early in 1958. Later, he joined
the Sierra Maestra's first front where he participated in several combats.

Because of his great qualities as a guerrilla, Ochoa Sanchez was chosen to
form part of the Antonio Maceo Column headed by Camilo Cienfuegos. He
participated in the heroic invasion as far as the country's central region.
The liberation struggle ended while he was in the region at a time when he
was a captain in the rebel army.

Loyal to his insurrectional struggle on behalf of our people's most
legitimate interests -- their liberation, sovereignty, and independence --
Comrade Ochoa Sanchez has been involved in a hard, growing, and
praiseworthy effort to organize and strengthen the Revolutionary Armed
Forces where he was held various positions. In adverse and difficult
conditions, Comrade Ochoa Sanchez has carried out several internationalist
missions with a particular spirit of sacrifice. He has thus shown his
ideological firmness, courage, and talent at the service of the cause of
national liberation and socialism.

These missions include his brilliant performance as commander of the Cuban
troops in Ethiopia which backed the resistance and the heroic battle of the
Ethiopian Armed Forces and masses against foreign intervention.

Therefore, the life of Ochoa Sanchez is a living example of the qualities
and merits with which men, of the most humble upbringing, have become
leaders with a true fiber of modesty and now enjoy the admiration, respect,
and affection of the masses.

Because of all this, the Council of State considers that to grant the
honorary title of Hero of the Republic of Cuba and the Order of Maximo
Gomez to Comrade Ochoa Sanchez on occasion of the 25th anniversary of the
triumph of the Cuban Revolution constitutes a well-deserved recognition of
his merits and an incentive to all fighters, cadres, revolutionary
militants, and our people who see in their most self-denying and courageous
sons a synthesis of their own virtues: honesty, unselfishness, spirit of
sacrifice, purity, the desire to excel, and heroism.

2. To take the necessary steps to present Ochoa Sanchez with the Gold
Start, which represents the title of Hero of the Republic of Cuba, and with
the insignia, which represents the Order of Maximo Gomez, at a solemn
ceremony.

Issued at the Palace of the Revolution in Havana on 1 January 1984.
[applause]
-END-


 |

