
TASS REPORTS CASTRO SPEECH AT STUDENTS CONGRESS

LD090928 Moscow TASS in English 0805 GMT 9 Dec 84

[Text] Havana December 9 TASS -- Fidel Castro, first secretary of the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of Cuba, president of the Council
of State and of the Council of Ministers of the Republic, has made a
closing speech at the sixth congress of the federation of the students of
secondary educational establishments. He said the Communist Party and the
Government of Cuba make every effort to ease the tension of the
international situation which has developed in many parts of the globe,
including Central America, through the fault of U.S. imperialism. At the
same time it is essential to be prepared to defend the gains of the
revolution and the country's independence against the treacherous and
powerful enemy -- U.S. imperialism.

Fidel Castro pointed out the importance of assistance to and support for
Cuba by the Soviet Union which, upon paving the way to socialism, crushed
fascism and is nowadays one of the most developed and mighty powers of the
world.

The main danger of a thermonuclear conflict emanates from the USA, because
war runs counter to the very idea of socialism, Fidel Castro stated.
Therefore the USSR, Cuba and other fraternal countries come out against the
militarist race and in favor of the destruction of deadly armaments. But we
have no other alternative than to prepare ourselves for defense against
aggressive encroachments by the USA and its allies.

Having pointed out Cuba's achievements in the fields of education, health
care, culture and sports, Fidel Castro drew special attention of the
members of new generations of Cubans to the importance of successful
implementation of the national economic development programme which is
intended for a period ending in the year 2000, and of the need to observe
the policy of economy and thrift and to show discipline and organization in
studies, work and preparation for the defense of the native land.
-END-


 |

