
CORRECTIONS TO CASTRO CLOSING SPEECH TO PCC

The following corrections pertain to the item headlined "Castro Speaks at
Party Congress Closing Session," published in the 5 December Latin America
DAILY REPORT:

Page Q 2, paragraph five, line six:

...been holding discussions, from the grass roots up, on matters regarding
the.... (rewording, supplying indistinct words)

Page Q 2, paragraph five, line six:

...within the party, the UJC [Union of Young Communists], the mass
organizations.... (supplying indistinct words)

page Q 3, paragraph one, line two:

...such great damage, because of the chaos created in connection with
relations, rules, fulfillment, and overfulfillment of plans. The manner in
which.... (rewording, supplying indistinct work, supplying queried word)

Page Q 3, paragraph one, line seven:

...the creation of material values or services. That would
simply....rewording, (supplying indistinct word)

Page Q 3, paragraph two, line two:

...work periods, the interruptos [people whose services are no longer
required but remain on the payroll], all of those....(supplying queried
word and editor's note)

Page Q 3, paragraph five, line two:

...in each municipality, in all the farms with sharecropping. There
were.... (supplying queried words, rewording)

Page Q 4, paragraph one, line four:

...is unquestionably a good program. I wish... (supplying indistinct word)

Page Q 4, paragraph three, line six:

...already been created. They began this term, not in a perfect way....
(supplying indistinct words, rewording)

Page Q 6, paragraph five, line six:

...make a revolution, seize revolutionary power, overthrow the tyranny
first, and then carry out a .... (supplying queried word, supplying
indistinct words,rewording)

Page Q 6, paragraph five, penultimate line:

...millions of workers, CDR [Committees for the Defense of the Revolution]
members, women, peasant, students.... (supplying indistinct word, providing
editorial notation)

Page Q 7, last paragraph, line ten:

...an everyday thing. It we do not fight this with all out strength, it
will lead to the skepticism, discouragement, and demoralization of the
masses.... (supplying indistinct words, rewording)

Page Q 9, last paragraph, line three:

...again -- is that people began to incur in deviation. Perhaps others have
incurred in those deviations but I, I have seen .... (supplying indistinct
words, rewording)

Page Q 13, paragraph four, line one:

...there another path to train doctors who are communist-minded? How about
those who do heart surgery, to cit an... (supplying indistinct words,
rewording)

Page Q 17, paragraph one, last line:

...chaos in salaries. [new paragraph] It can be... (deleting editor's note)

Page Q 18, paragraph six, line two:

...explain this to the comrades at this congress. I think some of this was
shown on television. I was telling them that we would have available for
imports half of the convertible foreign currency that we traditionally have
had. Imports that in... (supplying indistinct passage, deleting editor's
note, rewording)

Page Q 14, paragraph three, line six:

...been below the historic average. Throughout the past 6 years, between
1981 and 1986, including 1982 and 1986, rainfall has been.... (supplying
queried words)

Page Q 20, paragraph one, line four:

....concerning these factors. We should not go on ignoring them, these are
the.... (supplying indistinct words, rewording)

Page Q 20, paragraph three, line nine:

...the illusion that all this, that we are going to be...[Castro changes
thought] and that, therefore the path is.... (supplying queried words,
editor's note)

Page Q 21, paragraph four, line three:

...when the dust clears, they will see the revolution and party....
(supplying indistinct words)

Page Q 21. paragraph five, line four:

...more for any piece of junk they export to us, even a cooler [frozen],
ladies and gentlemen, even a small item like that that was priced at 2,000
pesos 12 or 14 yeas ago. We bought a few hundred in the seventies, many of
which ended up in the factories and facilities of the people's government.
There were some.... (supplying indistinct words, rewording)

Page Q 21, paragraph six, line one:

...price of the cooling [frozen]equipment, those that cost... (supplying
indistinct word)

Page Q 21, paragraph six, last line:

...applies to any raw material or resources from Third World countries.
[new paragraph] It's highway robbery. A crane that... (supplying indistinct
words, rewording)

Page Q 21, paragraph seven, line four:

...socialist bloc countries. You can now.... (deleting editor's note,
removing indistinct words)

Page Q 23, paragraph seven, line four:

...honor, all our dignity must be gathered.... (supplying indistinct word)

Page Q 23, paragraph one, line three:

...awareness about this among the people, of the importance of labor, of
working and devoting oneself to work. Work. That is established....
(supplying indistinct words, rewording)

Page Q 23, paragraph three, line four:

...sun is there, you cannot say that the sun... (supplying indistinct
words)

Page Q 23, paragraph six, line four:

...that they accept we have had progress in. We have to... (supplying
indistinct words)
-END-


 |

