
CASTRO CLOSES CENTRAL COMMITTEE PLENARY MEETING

FL241410 Havana Tele-Rebelde Network in Spanish 1200 GMT 24 Dec 86

[Text] Commander in Chief Fidel Castro, first secretary of the party's
Central Committee and president of the Councils of State and Ministers,
made the closing remarks at the party's Central Committee Third Plenary
Meeting held in Havana yesterday.

Fidel made a thorough analysis of the country's current economic situation
and the outlook for next year. He also talked about the various conditions
and causes of the problems, limitations, and difficulties we are facing.

The plenary meeting made a preliminary review of the 1987 economic plan and
state budget which, in accordance with the law, the National Assembly of
the Peoples' Government (ANPP) has to approve. The ANPP regular period of
sessions will be held on 25 and 26 December. The Central Committee also
approved the party's budget for next year, which is increasing its
self-financing as a result of the policies aimed at decreasing spending and
increasing income.

During the Third Congress [as heard], our Commander in Chief Fidel Castro
stressed the need for consistency and seriousness in the daily effort to
optimally utilize existing conditions and the country's potential in terms
of human resources, the work force's skills and cadres, as well as the
material resources we have. The first secretary of the Central Committee
again referred to the decisive role the human, ideologic, and consciousness
factors play, the need to inform, clarify, guide, and mobilize the masses
based on a realistic approach according to our possibilities, the
revolutionary experience, and our people's virtues and, at the same time,
give priority to labor education, discipline, ethics, and work culture.

Fidel expressed his deep conviction that the party will live up to this
historic battle and will be capable of guiding the state and lead all the
people with the example of its members.

In line with prevailing statutes, the Third Central Committee Plenary
Meeting approved the Politburo's proposal on the integration of the
National Committee of Control and Revisions headed by commander of the
revolution Juan Almeida Bosque, elected for this post by the Third Party
Congress. Also responding to a Politburo request, the Third Central
Committee Plenary Meeting elected comrades Carlos Aldana Escalante and
Pedro Ross Leal as secretariat members of the Central Committee.
-END-


 |

