
Notes Latin Revolutionaries

FL160402 Havana Radio Reloj Network in Spanish 0302 GMT 16 Jan 87

[Excerpts] In response to a question asked by a delegate participating in
the Eighth Latin American Congress of Students [CLAE], Fidel indicated that
the foreign debt, despite its negative effect, has contributed to our
peoples' awareness of the contraditions between the United States and our
countries. [passage omitted]

He also explained the result of the unequal trade which has a negative
effect in our goods and the cost of equipment poor countries have to
import. He said the most powerful capitalist country in the world
implements without consideration to Third World countries. [passage
omitted]

The Haitian delegate referred to the transcendency of the Cuban revolution
and said that during the days when dictator Duvalier was ousted some
slogans referring to Cuba were seen written on some walls. Fidel said no
freedom-speaking process has been able to be successful without paying a
high price with the loss of valuable lives. He mentioned Sandino and his
worthy army, Che and his guerrillas, as well as other movements on our
continent. Explaining his remark, "now we are really going to build
socialism," the commander in chief said it was related to this meeting with
Raul in the area known as Tres Palmas. He indicated that currently he is as
convinced of the triumph of our society as he was of the raise to power of
the working class and of the revolution at that time. [passage omitted]

Referring to internationalist practices he asserted that our country has
thousands of laborers and peasants who have offered their services to other
countries that have needed them in the military and civilian areas. He
added that currently close to 22,000 foreign scholarship holders study in
Cuba. This is one of the highest percentages in the world in relation to
our population.

Finally, the party's first secretary expressed his confidence that this
continent's youth will be able to continue carrying ahead the cause of
Latin American dignity.
-END-


 |

