
Discusses Electrification

FL162142 Havana Radio Reloj Network in Spanish 1800 GMT 15 May 87

[Text] In one of his many remarks during this morning's session of the
Seventh ANAP Congress, Fidel Castro said that the process of
electrification must be accompanied by the development of the cooperative
movement and the rural areas because we will achieve nothing if we spend
large sums of money only to provide the small properties with electricity.
This was the commander in chief's answer to a delegate from a credit and
service cooperative who was requesting the electrification of isolated
houses located within a cattle area. Electrification, the president of the
Councils of State and Ministers stressed, must be accompanied by the growth
of the Agricultural-Livestock Cooperatives [CPA]. Otherwise, we will find
ourselves with a highly developed power system and a prehistoric system of
working the land. Another issue that was broached was the one regarding the
[word indistinct] of areas. This is a problem that must be analyzed in a
casuistic manner in order to help in the development of the area's plan.
During the morning's session it was also mentioned there are some peasants
who do not want their children, and other family members, to join the
cooperative movement. They claim if they leave the farm the breeding of
pigs, sheep, and other animals would be affected. A delegate stressed those
who strongly oppose the creation of the CPA's are mostly technicians and
engineers who owe their education to the revolution.

Some of the 800 delegates attending the congress said there are some
peasants who do not sweat when working and who have lost their love for
work. These are peasants who want the revolution to give them everything,
yet they claim they are revolutionaries. A Granma Province representative
said the best revolutionary is one who works and makes the land produce. He
charged many peasants have joined the cooperative movement in order to
claim their retirement and have not done a single minute's work since then.
The low coffee yield was also discussed during the first session of the
ANAP congress being held at the Palace of Conventions in Havana by
Idalberto Cedeno, member of the Bartolome Maso Cooperative in Guantanamo.
Cedeno said an increase in the coffee yield must be sought in science and
improved techniques as well as in the proper attention of the coffee farms.
The member of the cooperative in Guantanamo said better footwear is
necessary for the mountain areas because the sneaker is not strong enough
to endure the obstacles encountered in those areas. It is also not safe
when the user is working on a slope. This increases the possibility of
accidents. Other delegates talked about the profitability of the
cooperatives, work [word indistinct], and the proper use of a work day.
Others discussed the issue of retirement.
-END-


 |

