
Family Doctor Program Viewed

FL022338 Havana Radio Reloj Network in Spanish 2034 GMT 2 Apr 87

[Text] Speaking of the family doctor program at the Fifth UJC Congress, our
Commander in Chief Fidel Castro said we do not want young people in those
positions to see their job as an obligation but as a way to serve the
revolution and fulfill themselves. Fidel remembered that the family doctor
program began in living rooms and garages, later moved to small premises,
and then the present doctors offices began to be built.

Our commander in chief noted that our doctors should have a solid
foundation. This is why a training program has been implemented at the
Guantananmo mountains, attended by doctors with the best records. He
indicated that the most important characteristic of family doctors should
be dedicated to work, but to achieve this intensive political work has to
be conducted.

Fidel insisted that young family doctors should remain in the same position
for 5, 10, 15 years or their entire lives. In a deep analysis, Fidel said
the work of a family doctor is very demanding and we have to thoroughly
train youth to face that important task.

The first secretary of the Communist Party of Cuba [PCC] indicated that
during his visit to the family doctor house-offices he has been able to see
the progress made and difficulties faced by doctors, who are mostly women.
Our commander in chief made reference to the important role the people play
in the work of the family doctor, because the residents of the various
territories should be capable of dealing with negative tendencies and
helping those young people as much as possible.

During the remarks on family doctors Commander in Chief Fidel Castro
asserted that the soldier, man, and doctor is not fulfilled without
political work. Referring to some difficulties discussed by the delegates
to the fifth UJC congress, the leader of the revolution said that young who
want to join the Carlos J Finlay Medical Sciences detachment are screened
better each year. He reasserted the need to increase political work,
education, and moral pressures to achieve positive changes in some family
doctors who are still not completely committed to their work. The commander
in chief said that the day will come when many of the most renowned
specialists will be family doctors. This will help hospitals do a more
serious work.

In his extensive remarks on the subject of family doctors, our Commander in
Chief Fidel Castro stressed that that is a very promising institution which
requires dedication and a spirit of sacrifice. The success of the family
doctor program is not only the responsibility of the Minsap [Ministry of
Public Health] and the people's government, said Fidel, but also of the
youth, and the PCC should follow closely its development and be aware of
its problems. Our top leader said that the revolution needs well trained
doctors; thus, the academic programs have been improved, following the most
advanced programs of all other countries. Fidel referred to the importance
of the comprehensive general medicine specialty to which 5,500 selected
students have enrolled. He added that we have to be optimistic and trust
time.
-END-


 |

