
CASTRO CALLS FOR THIRD WORLD SUPPORT FOR BRAZIL

PA200240 Havana PRENSA LATINA in Spanish 1012 GMT 19 Mar 87 -- FOR OFFICIAL
USE ONLY

[Text] Havana, 19 Mar (PL) -- Cuban President Fidel Castro has stated that
Brazil must be given as much support as possible cause it is waging a
struggle that benefits all Third World countries.

In referring to Brazil's decision to suspend interest payments on its debt
with international creditors, the Cuban leader said last night that "the
debt has become a dancer that keeps growing." I believe, he said, that we
have to unite in support of Brazil and give that country all the support of
the nonaligned, the Group of 77, the socialist countries, and the United
Nations.

We must do it because as I see it, Brazil is waging a struggle not only for
its own benefit but also because its struggle is our struggle and we are
waging a struggle that will benefit all Third World countries, Fidel Castro
said.

The Cuban leader cautioned: "A Brazilian defeat would be a terrible defeat
for us all" and "a Brazilian victory would be a great victory for us all."

Speaking to journalists who form part of the delegation headed by Brazilian
Foreign Minister Roberto de Abreu Sodre -- who today will conclude his
official visit to Cuba -- Fidel Castro noted that his position on the
foreign debt is not new. I have spent 3 years, he said, analyzing this
problem and events are demonstrating the validity of what we have stated.

Regarding the Brazilian case, the Cuban leader said that in addition to the
unity of all Third World countries in support of the South American
country, it is necessary to have internal unity in Brazil on the debt
issue.

Fidel Castro reiterated that the foreign debt is both uncollectable and
unpayable and that its causes are underdevelopment, unfair trade,
protectionism, and the exploitation that [Third World] countries have
endured since colonial days.

He said: For centuries they exploited us, took billions in gold,
accumulated wealth, and left us poor. He stated: "From a historic and moral
point of view we are creditors, not debtors."

Fidel Castro also noted that if the debt were to be erased but the
conditions were to remain as they now stand, or deteriorate, in 10 or 15
years, if there is no change in trade patterns, if there is no end to
[words indistinct] agreements by Brazil, Argentina, and Uruguay, a road I
think is a correct one.

During his talk with the Brazilian media during the reception offered by
Sodre for his Cuban counterpart, Isidoro Malmierca, Fidel Castro
characterized the contact established with various Brazilian sectors as
excellent. He said: We have had the privilege of having received the visit
of the foreign minister with whom we have held spiendid, very friendly and
fraternal talks.

I am proud of the way relations with Brazil have developed, Fidel Castro
stated after pointing out the similarities between the people from the two
nations. Later, the Cuban leader referred to the possibility of cooperating
with Brazil in the cure of vitiligo to make the treatment less expensive
for Brazilians who suffer that illness.

Fidel Castro also said that Cuba could become a market for many Brazilian
industrial products. Several private businessmen are currently in Havana,
and they are interested in commercial relations with the Caribbean island.

At a given moment during the unscheduled news conference at the conventions
Palace of Havana, the Cuban president said that he will visit Brazil only
when the government of that country decides it is both suitable and useful.
He noted: "It should be realize that a visit by me would not be a tourist
visit. I am a politician and any visit mine would always have political
connotation."
-END-


 |

