
Castro Speaks on Sugar

FL0911747 [Editorial Report] Havana Television Cubana Network in Spanish at
1652 GMT on 1 April carries coverage of the opening session of the Fifth
Congress of the Union of Young Communists, UJC, from Havana's Palace of
Conventions.

Announcer Maribel Puerto reports that the first topics discussed were sugar
industry problems and the youth's concerns with eliminating the obstacles
to the total success of the Cuban economy. The camera then cuts to three
unidentified delegates who address youth problems in the sugar centers. One
of the delegates states that the workers have to be told what their jobs
are and many times they are left without any guidance and with no knowledge
as to why their job is important. As a result, says the delegate, "he
leaves. It is easier to be in the street. There is no political work".

After the delegates' speeches, says the announcer, Cuban President Fidel
Castro spoke. The camera then shows Castro speaking from his seat at the
dais saying:

"Everything stated by the delegates are distinct circumstances, distinct
problems. We need to study them in depth to find the causes. I think that
we must also suggest ideas as to what to do and how it should be carried
out. Some ideas have been suggested here but I wanted to ask if there was
an administrator from a sugar center among the delegates. However, I
realized there wasn't because, generally, sugar center administrators are
not the comrade members of the youth organization. We need people who can
explain these problems to us and tell us what is being done.

"If there are any ideas in the Venezuela sugar center to create a cleaning
center, which I understand exists in other centers... [changes thought]. I
think the Urbano Noris center has one of these, which does the weeding,
eliminates straw. If there is a solution, if this has been considered, with
the various policies that are available ... [does not finish sentence].

"The comrade very respectfully said that the researchers surely knew what
they were doing. I say that the researchers truly knew nothing about what
they were doing. It is true.

There was carelessness in cane varieties, loss of time, bureaucracy. Sugar
centers wasted time for several years. I believe this is now different."
This is the extent of Castro's remarks.

The announcer concludes the report at 1657 GMT.
-END-


 |

