
CUBA

CASTRO DISCUSSES SUCCESS OF RECTIFICATION PROGRAM

PA082225 Havana PRENSA LATINA in English 2005 GMT 8 May 87 -- FOR OFFICIAL
USE ONLY

[Text] Havana, May 8 (PL) -- President Fidel Castro said here that the
process of rectification is leading Cuba to give real priority to
development and true growth.

The Cuban leader stated that the process which began here last year to
correct errors in the socioeconomic field is leading the country towards
better utilization of the people's intelligence, revolutionary fervor and
material resources, as well as responding to their needs.

Fidel Castro insisted on the need to work more intensively to strengthen
labour stability and continue improving income redistribution in favour of
lower-paid workers.

The Cuban president was chairing a meeting of national leaders which
analysed economic progress during the first quarter of 1987 and drafted new
guidelines to improve production.

The official daily GRANMA today gave full coverage to that meeting of the
central group, which is an important advisory and coordinating body in
national economic affairs. The meeting examined delays in the sugar
industry's production schedule caused mainly by an unusual rain pattern
through the year.

Fidel Castro reiterated that the country must fulfill its trade commitments
at all costs in the current economic climate and called for emergency
measures to complete the harvest.

The meeting also studied the favourable results and the problems in the
various economic spheres, such as agriculture, cattle rearing, fishing,
tourism, construction, and the food, iron and steel and other light and
heavy industries.

Nickel production surpassed its targets and other lines, such as
fertilizers, soda, chlorine and paper, came very close to forecasts.

The meeting also considered the technological difficulties hindering
progress in the important "Ernesto Che Guevara" nickel plant, which Cuban
and Soviet teams are working to eliminate.

Regarding the deficiencies found in some export products, Fidel Castro
stressed the need to raise the quality of Cuban products and said that
without high standards they cannot aspire to develop new export lines or to
broaden markets in a world suffering from contracting trade.
-END-


 |

