
CASTRO INTERVIEW WITH L'HUMANITE REPORTED

PM081101 Moscow IZVESTIYA in Russian 30 May 87 Morning Edition p 4

[TASS report: "Fidel Castro Interview"]

[Text] Paris, 29 May -- The Soviet Union's peace-loving policy generates
great interest in Latin America because it is a serious and consistent
policy, Fidel Castro, first secretary of the Communist Party of Cuba and
president of the Cuban Councils of State and Ministers, stated in an
interview published in L'HUMANITE.

The policy has won sympathy throughout the world, including on our
continent. The Soviet Union's course in favor of peace and disarmament is
taking the wind out of many fabrications and slanders.

F. Castro resolutely condemned Washington's aggressive policy toward
Nicaragua. The Reagan administration, he said, is trying to suppress the
Sandinist revolution by force. Nicaragua faces the constant threat of
direct U.S. military intervention. Washington is intent on openly
interfering in that independent country's internal affairs and is
torpedoing the Contadora Group's efforts to achieve a peaceful solution in
Central America. At the same time, the Cuban leader stressed, the White
House has failed to gain support for its aggressive policy toward
Nicaragua.

Dwelling in detail on the issue of developing countries' foreign
indebtedness to Western banks, F. Castro noted that the inhabitants are
still being robbed under this system. According to him, it is impossible to
repay the debts economically, arithmetically, or morally. He urged that the
debts be canceled, and called for a new international economic order to be
set up.

F. Castro dwelled on the situation in his own country. Recalling Reagan's
preelection promises to neutralize Cuba or wipe it off the face of the
earth if it continues the revolution, he pointed out that this threat has
forced the entire Cuban people to prepare for war. I believe the United
States is aware of the price it will pay if it invades Cuba. At the same
time he stressed Cuba's interest in living in peace with the United States.

F. Castro described the country's economic development in a situation of
world economic crisis as a true exploit. We are doing everything possible
to improve the people's material, social, cultural, and spiritual living
conditions.

As for the rectification of errors, the Cuban leader noted that this
process is aimed at improving the economic system and stepping up political
work. Dwelling in detail on the party's role in this, he said: We consider
the party's basic role to be building socialism, developing the country
economically, enhancing the economy's efficiency, and shaping socialist and
communist awareness.
-END-


 |

