
Castro Tours Habana Vieja Child-Care Centers

FL102029 Havana Radio Rebelde Network in Spanish 1800 GMT 10 Dec 87

[Text] Commander in Chief Fidel Castro, PCC Central Committee first
secretary, inaugurated this morning the first three child-care centers
built by the minibrigades in the Habana Vieja Municipality.

Fidel arrived at exactly 1000 at the Marineritos Childcare Center where he
spoke with construction workers, party leaders, and municipal government
officials.  During the tour, he asked about the construction work and
adaptations, as well as the present structure of the installation.  The
high point of the hours of joy and enthusiasm which the residents of Habana
Vieja were enjoying came when the commander in chief spoke at the Flor de
la Sierra Child-care Center before CDR [Committee for the Defense of the
Revolution] members, local residents, construction workers, and workers
involved in that project.

[Begin Castro recording] Today I am convinced the problems of Habana Vieja
have good, effective, beautiful solutions.  I think someday the great merit
and importance of the work here will be recognized.  My basic premise is it
is here that the most difficult problems need to be solved.  Today I am
convinced they can be solved and if we solve them here, we can solve them
anywhere in the city, anywhere in the country.  The merit here is in you;
in your enthusiasm, cooperation.  It was truly moving to give certificates
to three people here.  They symbolize this enormous mass effort, this
enormous productive, constructive, development effort. [end recording]

Accompanied by a large representation of party leaders, project workers,
and personnel who will work at the child-care center, Fidel toured the
beautiful Los Amiguitos del Comercio installation.

The new child-care centers inaugurated today in Habana Vieja have been
built in the current architecture of that area, which is the cultural
patrimony of humanity.  There still remain three new child-care centers to
complete the six planned for the current year.  A total of 11 child-care
centers will be inaugurated today in Havana.

This will fulfill by 30 percent the goal of completing 50 new installations
of this kind for children and working mothers.

-END-


 |

