
CUBA MARKS ANNIVERSARY OF NATIONAL UPRISING

Moscow TASS in English 1641 GMT 12 Jul 75 LD

[Text] Havana, July 12, TASS--A military exercise called the 22th
anniversary of storming the Moncada barracks, which was timed down to the
Cuban people's holiday--the day of the July 26 national uprising--came to
an end in the Havana province.  On the same day in 1953 a revolutionary
detachment led by Fidel Castro attacked the Moncada barrack, the stronghold
of the reactionary dictatorship.  The exercise ended up with a military
parade whose participants were addressed with a speech by Raul Castro.  The
second secretary of the Communist Party of Cuba Central Committee and
minister of the revolutionary armed forces, who took special note of the
excellent training and high military alert of the units and forces, and the
ability to handle sophisticated military technology and arms demonstrated
by soldiers, sergeants and officers.

Then Raul Castro held on the international situation.  He stressed the
successes of the relaxation of international tensions now going ahead under
the impact of the might and consistent peace-loving policies of the Soviet
Union and other socialist countries.  However, the minister pointed out,
since imperialism would not abandon its aggressive policy, nor its enmity
toward the socialist states and other countries militating from the
anti-imperialist positions, safeguarding their sovereignty, maintaining
independent policies, fighting for the return of their natural riches and
social progress, Cuba could continue to adhere firmly to the policy toward
increasing her defensive capabilities.

Alongside this, Raul Castro said further, we shall continue marching toward
new successes in the settlement of socio-economic problems.  In this effort
the Soviet Union extends noble all-around assistance to Cuba.  Cuba
cooperates in a brotherly fashion with other countries of the socialist
community.  The republic has a wonderful industrious people who, fully
aware of its historical responsibility and under the guidance of the
Communist Party with Fidel Castro at the head, is raising enthusiastically
the edifice of new society.

Raul Castro voiced the confidence that the decisions of the Communist Party
of Cuba first congress, due in December and adoption of the country's new
constitution would provide a mighty incentive for the further turbulent
development of socialist upbuilding.
-END-


 |

