
Urges Improving Management

FL0907165588 Havana Radio Progreso Network in Spanish 1100 GMT 9 Jul 88

[Text] Yesterday Commander in Chief Fidel Castro closed the third meeting
of Havana enterprises.  He stressed that while the first meeting held in
1986 reflected the chaos that existed, this one has shown that the party
cadres are working in the correct direction.

During the last day of the meeting, the participants discussed topics such
as work stability, new labor organization methods in the textile industry,
promotions, the work-study system, and cement and iron rod production.

The meeting was held at the Karl Marx theater and was attended by
approximately 4,000 delegates and guests, including enterprise directors
and leaders of the party, state, government, people's government, the UJC
[Union of Young Communists], and trade unions.

In his closing speech, Fidel said that it is important to know how much
everything costs, each article, the price of raw material and all other
resources that are needed.  We live in a time in which we have to work
hard, he said, and it is necessary to see work as the instrument that
allows us to advance victoriously.

At another point in his speech, Fidel said:

[Begin Castro recording] We are not going back to the times of idealism.
On the contrary, we are taking all the consequences and experiences we have
from the times of idealism and the times of the profiteers.  We will take
all the wisdom accumulated by our people, party, and cadres and develop
solutions.  We will reconstruct the management and planning system, create
its basis.

What value do we place on incentives?  Do we place a value on them?  Should
we place a value on salaries?  How do we apply the socialist formula?  How
will we work, measure efficiency?  How will we calculate this?  How will
we award efficiency?  No one's against doing this.  How will we do it?  How
will we promote development?  We will improve or change ourselves with a
better instrument or a better management and planning system for the
economy.  [end recording]
-END-


 |

