
Castro Presides at Chilean Solidarity Event

FL0510200888 Havana Radio Reloj Network in Spanish 1902 GMT 5 Oct 88

[By Madeline Murgia]

[Text] Commander in Chief Fidel Castro today presided over the act of
solidarity with the Chilean people held in Havana's Salvador Allende
Hospital.

The leader of the Cuban revolution said the Cuban people today pay the most
sincere and beautiful tribute to our beloved friend, Salvador Allende, and
to the Latin American women meeting in our capital.  Fidel added that this
is a historic day and that the Salvador Allende Hospital, with its great
merits and through fulfillment of its responsibilities in the field of
health, honors the memory of the Chilean president.

Fidel said that two big institutions in Cuba carry his name.  One is a
school with more than 1,500 students and the other is the hospital in
Havana, recalling that Allende was a political teacher of patriotism and a
doctor who was constantly concerned with the health of his people.

In closing the act of solidarity with Chile, Fidel said that today is a
historic day because the Chilean people are carrying out the great battle
of the plebiscite.  As of today, he said, nothing will be the same in that
brother country.

The highest Cuban leader said that it is possible, or almost certain,
Pinochet has fallen into his own trap with the fierce campaign he has
conducted, and on which he has spent millions of dollars, to manipulate
world public opinion.

He added the Pinochet is the spoiled child of imperialism because he is not
accused of anything.  In addition, said Fidel, he receives billions of
dollars in credit, something that no other country has ever received.  This
is the type of government that the imperialists are interested in, said
Fidel, because it increases the earnings of the multinational firms with
the unemployment of millions of people and the hunger of many families.

The Chilean people will not vote in favor of Pinochet and the immense
majority will be against his hateful system because the Chileans cannot
forget about the 15 years of crimes or of the thousands of people tortured
and missing, said Fidel.

In speaking at the ceremony expressing solidarity with Chile, the Cuban
leader said that there is much anticipation throughout the world and the
unknown begins today with the results of the plebiscite.

Fidel said that if Pinochet wins with his fraudulent maneuvers, this will
be against all the laws of history and human dignity.  However, if they
allow the "no" to triumph, history will be different.  The highest Cuban
leader said that if fraud is imposed upon the Chilean people, history will
also be different because the Chileans who took to the streets will make
sure that history will be different no matter what Pinochet does.

It is not possible to consider that the Chilean people will vote in favor
of a government that constantly maintains the presence of tear gas and that
beats and tortures the people, said Fidel in his speech closing the act
expressing solidarity with Chile.

He said the Chileans are aware of the need for the plebiscite, but it is
not known what will happen and the question now is:  What will the first
news reports and official statements say, and what will happen in Chile
this afternoon and tonight?

Upon unveiling a statue of Salvador Allende--which was created by a Cuban
artist, a conscious and revolutionary man--in the hospital that bears his
name, Fidel said that this is a very symbolic day.

Salvadoran Commander (Mercedes del Carmen Letuna); Ana Lobo, member of the
Chilean delegation attending the women's meeting; and Tanya Gonzalez,
director of the Salvador Allende Hospital, also spoke at the ceremony.
-END-


