
Castro Inaugurates Havana Polyclinics

FL2207152589 Havana Radio Rebelde Network in Spanish 2335 GMT 19 Jul 89

[Speech by President Fidel Castro during the main ceremony inaugurating six
polyclinics and a home for the elderly in Havana City held at the Wilfredo
Santana Rivas Polyclinic in Habana del Este--live]

[Text]  Comrades from Habana del Este, I imagine there are also some people
here from Guanabacoa and from all over the province, is that not so?
Especially from [Unidentified person, interrupting:  From hospitals and
polyclinics.]  Oh, from hospitals and polyclinics.  So we have the entire
hospital family here and also construction workers.

Is there a problem there?  [laughter]  [Castro addresses unidentified
person]  Do you want to come and speak here also?  He doesn't even need a
microphone with the voice he has.  What?  He wants to give me a pen?  He
has to deliver a speech here if he comes to the stage.  Let him come, let
him come.  [repeats]  Help him come up, [applause] [Castro addresses
unidentified child]  Come, come.  First give me a hug and then give me the
pen.  [applause]  [Passage indistinct]  Very well.

Do you know something?  He is made out of lead. [laughter] Are you made out
of lead?  You could be a boxer, weightlifter, or wrestler.  Where did you
get this pen?  Is it yours?  It's new.  Is this really a gift?  Were you
the one calling: Fidel, Fidel, Fidel?  What are you going to tell the
people now?  Good morning or good evening?  What are you going to sing?
[Child says: Nothing.]  What is your name?  Can't you tell me your name?
You don't know your name?  [laughter]  Where do you live?  [Child says:
Fourth Street.]  Where?  [Child repeats:  Fourth Street.]  Fourth Street.
What's the address?  [Child says: 3223.]  Oh! So, what would you do if you
got lost in Havana and were by yourself?  What would you do?  You already
know your address.  Fourth Street, 32 what?  [laughter]  3223?  What is it?
But, in which neighborhood?  [Child answers:  Bahia.]  Oh.  It's in this
same one we are in now, isn't it?  No, over there.  Very well, very well.
Thank you very much, son.  Very well.  [applause]  He is made out of lead.
He weighs a tone.

Well, it doesn't rain here but it doesn't stop raining either.  It is just
sprinkling.

I was going to tell you that other comrades have already mentioned many of
the things I could talk about.  The comrade who is second in line
responsible for minibrigades explained what they were doing and what they
have done.  He explained what they have done in the entire city.  He
recalled that precisely here in the east, around Habana del Este, in
Alamar, was where the minibrigade movement got started.  Also, Comrade
Frank Tobey [Havana City Province health provincial director] explained to
us some interesting figures related to health in the capital.

Some results are pretty impressing.  They say infant mortality is at 10.8
this year compared to around 13 last year.  They have also dared to attempt
to reduce the infant mortality rate in the capital to less than 10.  It
will be a true feat if they achieve it.  We would have to find out the
index Washington has in order to compare them.  I do not believe they are
at the level Cuba's capital has.

We read the news about violence, murders, drugs, and all those types of
situations there in the U.S. capital.  We know that many rich people live
next to many more poor people who live under difficult conditions.  There
is a black population that is discriminated against.  It has a larger
unemployment rate.  Logically, I imagine there must be two mortality rates,
one for whites and another for blacks.  The one for whites is probably very
low.  Not for all of them because there are also whites who are poor, walk
around the streets begging and all that.  They don't have a place to sleep.
Of course, there is also an entire rich oligarchy that has access to good
hospitals--not better than these we are building.  Rich people surely have
hospitals and services similar to these.  Poor people have none of this.
Since most of the black population is poor it does not have access to these
services.

Frank Tobey was saying that only socialism can do this.  I do not believe
this is a propaganda statement.  I do not believe so.  It can be shown very
easily.  I believe these programs we are inaugurating today show it.  He wa
saying that we have inaugurated six polyclinics and a home for the elderly.
We visited those six polyclinics today.  Some were finished recently,
others a few weeks ago, and others, 2, 3 months or more ago.

As he was explaining, with these 6, we have 9 of the 20 new polyclinics
that compose the program in the capital.  The minibrigade comrades made the
commitment to complete the remaining 11 this year.  I believe they will
finish them.  It will be necessary to give them some help.  It will be
necessary to guarantee them construction material.  Undoubtedly, we will
have the 20 needed polyclinics by the end of the year, the 20 new ones.  It
is not that the number of polyclinics will increase but most of them
replace the polyclinics that did not have the adequate buildings and
resources to provide services.

He was saying that there will be 78 in all.  This confuses me a bit.  I
thought there were 74 polyclinics in the capital plus some such as, for
example, the Antilla de Acero, which is a special polyclinic that is not
for the population but for factory employees.  Frank?  [Unidentified
speaker:  Words indistinct]  Oh, 16 replace others and there are 4 new
ones.  The one at Antillana de Acero is not included in the 78.  It is not
included.  So, the figures have been clarified; 16 replace old
installations and 4 are completely new.  We will have 78 polyclinics in the
capital with adequate installations.

We will have to continue doing something regarding polyclinics.  We saw
many interesting things during today's tour.  First of all, we saw a staff
that is very dedicated to its work.  I observe the staff that works at the
polyclinics a lot; the director--male or female director--and the deputy
director--male or female deputy director--people with different
responsibilities, the male or female secretary of the nucleus, the trade
union, the UJC [Union of Young Communists], that is, people from all areas
represented in the center.  I saw a lot of people filled with a great love
for what they are doing.  They are well trained people.  They are
enthusiastic people.  A great humane and technical quality can be seen in
them.  It can be sad that is characterizes the staff that works in these
polyclinics.  Undoubtedly, one sees an activity that creates interest,
enthusiasm, and love in the workers.

Of course, we were able to see the quality of the construction equipment
and services provided.  Some are completely new and very necessary--for
example, the physical therapy services.  They did not exist in polyclinics.
When some citizen needed those services they had to go to one of the few
hospitals that did have them.  Physical therapy services had been
concentrated at the Julio Diaz Hospital located at the Boyeros
neighborhood.  Some time ago, we started to work on the idea to develop
these services.  We thought it was important.  Every day we convince
ourselves more of their importance.

We built the first polyclinic in Lawton as an experiment.  This is where we
begin to test the family doctor concept.  The information the hospital
management gave regarding the progress of those services showed a very
interesting thing:  first, the enormous need for those service.  Thousands
of people had gone through there in a few months.  We estimated that
hundreds of thousands people needed those services in the capital--hundreds
of thousands.  It had already been decided to establish physical therapy
services in each new polyclinic.  There is something else.  Not only
physical therapy services would be established but also a physical therapy
gymnasium.  They are two different things.  Physical therapy services can
be established without the gymnasium.  Physical therapy uses infrared rays,
diathermal rays, heat, ultrasound, and a variety of things.  It is better
rounded when physical therapy services and the physical therapy gymnasium
are available.  It is better rounded.

These 20 polyclinics--some have already been inaugurated and others are to
be completed this year--all have physical therapy services and the physical
therapy gym.  They have trained and qualified personnel.  In addition, the
staff is young.  Undoubtedly, they will acquire a lot of experience in this
field with the course of time.  We have also done something.  After the one
in Lawton was built, physical therapy services were established in 17 other
polyclinics even though they do not have gyms.

In our tour through Playa, over in Sanata Fe, and later in Arroyo
Naranjo--especially in Arroyo Naranjo, San Miguel del Padron, and El
Cotorro--I was told the same thing in the three places.  I was told:  You
can imagine how this service is here because it is the only one we have in
the municipality.

I was told this in each one of these municipalities--I repeat, in Arroyo
Naranjo, San Miguel del Padron, and El Cotorro.  Among the polyclinics we
inaugurated today were those three.  Those are the first polyclinics they
have.  I was told they come from everywhere in the municipality to receive
those services.  How many people have received services?  I was told that
thousands have already received services--thousands.  They say the
polyclinic is a blessing for the municipality.  They didn't have a place to
go.  They used to have to go to far away hospitals.  They had to go to the
Julio Diaz Hospital.  The polyclinic is extremely important.

Other polyclinics are going to be built in some municipalities.  They are
going to have two services.  I started to get interested there in the
situation of the other polyclinics, the ones that are not new.  I asked the
party leader in each one of them about the ideas he had.  Of course, I was
saying that there are 18 of the old polyclinics where physical therapy
services have been established, 18.  How many would there be in all?
Thirty-eight.  This service needs to be established in 40 polyclinics.  Not
only this.  Our idea is that all 78 of them not only have physical therapy
services but also the physical therapy gym.

Of course, everything is easy when you build a new building.  Look at this
100-meter track.  I believe some Pan-American Games competition could be
held at this polyclinic's track.  I do not know if there will be a day when
the polyclinics will hold competitions for those over 40, 50, or 60.  The
track would be good for any competition and it is very pretty.

It is easy to create services when the building is new and there is enough
room because what a headache it would be if some were built in Habana
Vieja.  We would have to build behind the facade because construction is
done behind the facade so that the architecture which is full of cultural
value is not altered.  It is more difficult in Centro Habana.  But I
believe solutions can be found to reach the goal of establishing the
service.  The physical therapy service can always be established inside the
polyclinic.  There is always an area for it.  The physical therapy gym is
the one that can be a little bit more difficult.  It can be placed next to
the polyclinic in some cases and half way down the block in others.  If
space cannot be found or there is not a lot next to it, then it can be
located a little further.  In sum, the physical therapy gym is extremely
important for the quality of medical services.

The age of the population is increasing although often times young people
need these services.  Ask the olympic team athletes.  They need physical
therapy services very often.  I believe this benefits people of all ages
although, of course, those who are a little older possible need these
services more.  I am not included among them.  [laughter]  I exercise and
try to administer my own physical therapeutical, physical therapy [corrects
himself].  What would that be called?  Not physical therapy but physical
therapeutical.  What is that science called?  What?  It's all right.  We
will assign the task to the language academy to look up that word.

I was talking to Lezcano [first secretary of the Communist Party of Cuba in
City in Havana Province] about our new goal.  What else do we have to do in
the area of polyclinics?  We need to speed-up the physical therapy services
and gym program I mentioned.  I know that our workers, our brigade workers
can do this.  It is easier than a family doctor house-office.  If they are
building 400 family doctor house-offices this year, each can build three
rooms for physical therapy gyms.  It is a relatively simple task for
minibrigades.

Of course, when our network is completed, all this primary care provided
through polyclinics will be complemented by the family doctor.  It is what
will really--how do you say?--top it off for the capital's primary medical
services once we have all the family doctors needed.  There are many
polyclinics that have their areas covered by family doctors.  Their entire
areas are covered by doctors who studied this.  They are not doctors who
graduated and simply began to acquire practical experience but they are
doctors who after a year they begin to study to become specialists in
general comprehensive medicine.  They will always continue taking courses;
they will continue to study.

So, in the future all this group of young doctors will compose a big group
of expert doctors who will bring something truly extraordinary to the
health services of our capital.  This has been said.  This will be achieved
with the support they have in the polyclinics.

Frank mentioned some interesting figures.  He said over 60 percent of the
population already receives the family doctor services but 65 percent of
the population will be reached this year.  Fewer house-offices are being
added because family doctor house-offices are being added because family
doctor house-offices are larger and more resources and work is involved.
This is why we have reduced the number of house-offices and have increased
the number of family doctors we send to work centers, schools, and child
care centers.

We will send 50 doctors to child care centers this year.  They already had
two nurses and now they are going to have a doctor in addition to the
nurses.  We are also going to send doctors to a number of work centers, to
bust terminals, among them, in order to guarantee efficient medical
services there.  This will contribute to the program we are carrying out to
improve transportation services and consolidate the achievements reached
during the last few weeks.  The family doctor program will continue.  Those
programs that provide services to the community have priority.

We are also planning to send them to work centers, all child care centers,
schools, everywhere the population goes.  We are combining the services
now.  The ability to reach 65 percent of the population is a high, very
high figure.  We will have reached it in only 5 years.  Only 5 years ago we
had 10 doctors and now we have over 2,000.  Naturally, this is going to put
our country's population, therefore also our capital's population--we are
talking about the capital today--in a privileged position regarding
medical services.  We will even be able to say then that it has the best
medical services in the world.  The best medical service in the world,
here.

We already begin to have it.  It can be seen in the health indexes.  Since
nobody has... [changes thought] We were the first ones to develop this
family doctor concept in primary care.  We complement this with the
polyclinic network and, at another level, with the clinical-surgical and
specialized hospitals.  We will definitely have top-rate services covering
the whole age spectrum, from children all the way to the elderly.

This is also complemented with some ideas being develop such as the
grandfather clubs.  This is also something new.  Young people have a lot.
[Unidentified speaker:  Words indistinct]  But they have youth, is that not
enough?  Young people have been assigned to develop the country, they need
to ask for little and do a lot.  [applause] [chuckles]  They say they don't
have a lot of things for entertainment.  I believe they were referring to a
movie theater.  That it was unfair.  They wanted a small movie theater or a
video viewing room.  It appears as though this young lady who has such as
strong voice... [changes thought] I don't know if she works in a
minibrigade.  Forty-one?  You look very young.  [laughter] I said 41 but,
of course, one is young at 41.

But look, you are just a few meters away from the Pan-American Games
facilities.  There is an olympic stadium, there are tennis courts, swimming
pool complexes, and a velodrome.  these are things that this country didn't
have anywhere.  What will the people from Baracoa say?  What will the
people from Baracoa say?  [repeat]  In addition, there is a hotel, a new
neighborhood for workers, the eastern beaches are close by, there are good
communication systems, polyclinics, schools, jobs.  Where else in the world
do young people have all this?  [applause]

Of course, it is better to talk about the elderly.  For example, we need
homes for the elderly.  We visited one today.  It was built around a house
that became notorious near here in Celimar.  It is a pretty area.
Architects and construction workers worked on it.  They expanded it and a
home for 100 elderly people was created.  We were there.  We talked with
them.  We saw the comfort they have there.  The expressed their
appreciation with deep emotion.  Their appreciation was not needed.  One
does not need to be thanked for fulfilling ones duty.  But, in a way, they
expressed their acknowledgement to the attention the Revolution attempts to
give to the elderly.

The two stages of life, childhood--a child such as the one that came here
to the stage--and old age.... [changes thought]  His name is Lenin?  What a
good name!  Great!  Now more than ever it is good that his name is Lenin.
[applause]  It is good that there are children named Lenin now that
imperialism believes that socialism is declining.  Imperialism and
capitalism are the ones that are declining, not socialism.  This is what
imperialists dream about because their decline is ordained by history.

We were saying that we saw 94-year-old women.  Figure out what is a life
after experiencing 94 years of work and dedication to something.  We saw
there people with the strength they have left and how they struggle and
live with the strength they have left.

A visit to a child center and a home for the elderly shows us the two
opposite ends of life, the two sides of life.  They are living there.  They
obviously do not have a place to live and obviously do not have someone to
look after them.  Curiously, I say that they were happy.  The workers said
they were very happy.  It must be great for a 94-year-old person to be able
to say he is happy at that age.  I was also told that not only elderly
people who are alone live there.  There are also elderly spouses there,
elderly couples, who have their own room.  I was thinking, what a noble
task that is.  Where would those human beings be now and how would they be
without that home?  How would they be?

I hope that the 41-year-old young lady who was asking for things for young
people will not need a home for the elderly to be cared for in 53 years.
[applause]

Going back to our subject of health, I was talking about the significance
of these programs.  I did not mention a part of these programs, dental
services.  Each one of these polyclinics have dental offices with excellent
chairs and with new and very well-trained personnel.  I believe the person
responsible for health at the Arroyo Naranjo Municipality was telling met
that we only had 24 dental chairs in the municipality a few years ago and
now we have 80 available to provide services to the population of almost
200,000.  This shows the progress made.  They only had 24 dental chairs a
few years ago and now they have 80.  They are going to continue to
increase.  Another polyclinic is being built there.  They are truly very
well-rounded institutions.

I was saying tat polyclinics are a complete concept in medical services.
Not only medical institution but research centers are also making important
achievements.  For example, they have developed an excellent medication to
treat burns.  They developed it after the unfortunate accident in the
Soviet Union in which two trains caught fire because of a gas leak.  We
immediately sent almost everything we had here.  We sent 80 percent of our
supplies to treat approximately 200 patients.  We are satisfied with the
way in which the Soviets recognized the quality of this medication and the
way in which they recognized our medical achievements.

Currently, our country has--and it is the only country in the world that
has it--the vaccine against meningococci type B.  The demand aboard for
this vaccine is growing.  It is growing a lot.  Thus, we are forced now to
increase the production of this vaccine not only for our own needs but also
for the demand that has been created.  Research centers are working very
hard in this field.  Factories and the steelworking and electronic industry
are working on the development of new equipment for our medical services.
We are truly on the path toward becoming a medical power.

We have inaugurated important hospital projects recently, the Miguel
Henriquez Hospital, for example, and the Albarran Hospital.  The Mariano
Children's Hospital is about to be inaugurated.  This is also the case for
the intensive care room at the Salvador Allende Hospital.  Somebody talked
about it here.  He said that it only needs the elevators, which already
arrived and are being installed.  So, these projects will be ready to be
inaugurated in the next few weeks.  I am only referring to these big
projects but there are tens and tens of other mid-size projects in the
field of health that are being developed.

Yes, we will be a medical power.  We have no other choice than to be a
medical power; not because of what has been said, not because of what has
been said [repeats] but because of what has been done.  This is already
taking us to the level of medical power.  We are making more progress in th
capital but this does not mean that excellent health services are not
available in the rest of the country.  They do exist.  Statistics show it.
The mere fact that infant mortality rate in several provinces is lower than
that of the capital shows it.  Now the capital is making efforts to reduce
it to less than 10.  We still have some municipalities with larger indexes.

Undoubtedly, we will improve health conditions as we solve sanitary
problems; as we improve the city's environment; and as we have better
sewage and other services; and above all, as we have better housing and
housing conditions.  We are working on all these things to improve health
conditions.

The minibrigade member talked here about other projects.  He mentioned what
they are doing for the Pan-American Games, housing they are building in
Habana del Este alone.  He mentioned the special education schools, the
child care centers they had completed--10 child care centers in this area.
We are also saturated of child care centers.

There are three programs that have been completed or about to be completed.
The child care center program has been completed.  The number of child care
centers that need to be built per year is much lower.  This depends on
increasing needs but, basically, the child care program has been completed.

The polyclinics program will be completed this year.  We will have
completed three full programs with the other important program, the special
education schools program.  We plan to finish 24 this year.

The bakeries program is being fulfilled with the building of the 100 that
had to be built.  This was done to make bread more easily available to the
population--that old tradition.  It was shown that big bakeries did not
solve the problem of those semi-primitive bakeries, of the not very
industrialized bakeries.  This is undoubtedly the formula to solve that
problem.

There is also an ambitious program this year consisting of 156 produce
markets to complete the produce market network.  This is an important
program.  It will be completed this year or perhaps it will take a few
months next year.  I repeat, they are 156.  We will then have over 400
places in the city to distribute tubers and vegetables.

There is also a program for market centers [mercados concentradores] that
will be built within a few months.  Very rational measure are being
implemented so that some enterprises will supply the produce markets
directly.  Citrus, for example.  Citrus will go through market centers only
for accountability but citrus will not be touched.  It will already come
packed and will go to the produce markets, or little markets, or whatever
you want to call them.  Other produce such as banana will also come
directly from the enterprise.  It will hardly be handled.  It will have the
minimum of handling at the market centers.  This is a truly rational method
of distributing produce.  This is added to the plans to increase the
production of tubers and vegetables in Havana Province and the entire
country--tubers, vegetables, and fruits.

This is an important program that is under way.  This program was created
this year.  It was added to the plans the city had.

Another important program being accelerated is the bus terminal program.
Eight were needed and there were being build.  They were supposed to be
completed in 1991 but we said:  Let's build them in 1989.  This involved an
extra effort to solve some of the problems.  The eight terminals are being
built.

There are forces that.... [changes thought]  For example, the brigade that
built this polyclinic, the Suarez Gayol, finished here, worked in the
sugarcane harvest, and after the harvest--the Blas Roca contingent did the
earthwork--the Blas Roca contingent was completing the earthwork when the
Suarez Gayol brigade laborers began to build the Santa Fe bus terminal.
They are working in two shifts.  They are working 24-hours a day with two
shifts.  One of the laborers was here.  We had the honor of having him here
on stage.  He said:  If we are supplied with the materials, we will finish
the project this year.  He said it with a lot of conviction and firmness.
They know what they are capable of doing.

The 24-school program I mentioned earlier will provide the capital with all
the special education schools it needs. One has to see what these special
education schools are.  If we spoke of the elderly we can also speak about
the special education school that is located here in Guanabacoa.  It is a
school for children who have eyesight problems.  I am not talking about
blind children but those who are visually impaired.  Those children could
lose their sight without those schools.  One has to see those children.
One has to also visit those schools.  It is another side, another part of
society's problems.  It is not these children's fault that they came to the
world with some of these problems.  It can happen to anyone.

One has to see how those schools are, the specialists, the equipment, and
the teachers they have.  One has to see how they are taught, how they are
educated, and how they are cured.  They don't simply teach them how to read
and write at that school but the children are taught and are helped to
practice the necessary exercises to solve their problems and become normal
children in the future.  Look how important these programs are among the
many the Revolution is working on now.

There are other schools for children with behavior problems, with hearing
problems, some kind of mental retardation, or blindness.  There is help and
a response for all these children.  This is the Revolution; this is
socialism.

Comrade Frank Tobey was completely right.  I ask myself how would this be
possible is socialism [corrects himself] in capitalism?  How is it possible
to have all the child care centers or working mothers need in the capital,
at a reasonable price in a capitalist society?  For each peso the mother
pays, the state possibly contributes 3 pesos so that the child receives an
education, so that his mind is developed.  Those child care centers develop
the children's minds.  They have trained personnel for that.  The staff has
learned to do that.

Can a capitalist system say that all working mothers have a place to send
their children, their small children?  Which city in the world has this?
New York?  London?  Paris?  Rome?  Madrid?  I would like to get a response
to see if they have solved this problem in those cities and if poor
families or the workers' families always have a place to take those
children.  I would like to learn about a place where the state contributes
3 pesos for each one the mother pays.  This is for all and not for a
privileged elite or for millionaires.  [applause]

Which country in the world has the family doctor program?  Which capitalist
country?  Which of these cities have those services there, 20 meters, 30
meters, or 100 meters from the home?  What place provides each family,
father, mother, child, adolescent, elderly person with a family doctor who
is available day and night?  This is part of our primary health care
network which will be completed in December of this year.

Which city has physical therapy services next to where the patients live?
Washington?  London?  Paris?  Madrid?  These services are available for
anything, for any aching muscle.  It can be treated with ultrasound or heat
There are services to help with any joint that may bother you.  I ask
myself, where, where [repeats] are all medical services provided for free,
from the filling of a tooth to a heart transplant.  [applause]  From those
things that cost $20.00--because I imagine that the lowest fee you pay to
get a tooth pulled in a capitalist country is at least $20.00 and if
anesthesia is used it may be around $50.00.  I believe it costs $20.00 to
pull a tooth.

One of those major surgeries could cost $100,000, $150,000.  What country
performs free kidney transplants, extracorporeal litholopaxy, or a complex
bone surgery or surgery of any vital organ to any citizen in the country?
I was asking which country could have the family doctor program.  Let them
try to have family doctor programs in any of those capitalist countries I
mentioned.  What they are going to have is a medical war that will be much
more violent than the medical wars of which history talks.  The government
that attempts to do it will suffer because of private medicine.

I know about a minister from an important European country.  I am going to
mention it.  It is France.  He was a communist minister because there was a
socialist-communist coalition government.  I met him because he came here.
He tried to touch some privileges.  He clashed with some of the privileges
of private medicine such as certain facilities they had in hospitals they
worked in, certain beds in which, if the individual had money and had to
have surgery, he would get the surgery right away and if he didn't have
money he would have to wait 4 or 5 months to have it.  He clashed with only
some of the privileges and only lasted a few months as minister.

How could this institution of ours, the family doctor program, be
established in a capitalist society, within the capitalist system?  How
could this be done?

Now, I say the same thing I have said about all this.  They have problems
of one kind or another.  They couldn't create a program of generalized
services for children who have problems with their hearing, eyesight,
mental retardation, behavioral problems or many other problems.  There are
also physically handicapped children and special education schools are
being built for physically handicapped children.  What country, which of
those capitals can say that they have the answer for 100 percent of the
children with those needs?  Undoubtedly, the day will come when we will
also have the answer for the needs of all our elderly people.  There are
extensive and ambitious plans in this field.

Which of these dehumanized cities has these services?  If capitalism cannot
do for man what socialism can do and what socialism is doing, even in a
Third World country, in a country that does not have the fabulous wealth
those countries have.... [changes thought]  Those countries have developed
by exploiting the world, by looting the Third world for centuries.  This is
how they became wealthy and powerful.  They have a lot of scientists and
technologies.  They got it out of the sweat and blood of the Third World.
If they cannot solve these basic problems, what the devil is capitalism
good for?

Do we or don't we have the right to say that a society that is incapable of
getting close to man and solve man's basic problems is no good?  [applause]
This is the idea we have of a capitalist society no matter what they say
with their propaganda and media, no matter what they say and what they
think.

We have had the experience.  We have not read it in a story book or a fairy
tale.  We have experienced it and are experiencing it in the work of the
Revolution, in the day to day work of each of our compatriots.

Leave it to time and we will see how we will fulfill all of our programs,
one after the other.  I have talked about education many times.  It is
extremely important.  Our system can also do what no other system can.
Also, the development of our agriculture is based on the foundations we hav
created and are developing to completely solve the food problem despite the
problems the world has today.  We also want to solve the problem of
recreation.  We do not mean to exclude it.  Of course, we include it in our
plans but we do not give it priority over a school which can save a child's
eyesight, or life.

Leave it to time and you will see the industrial development, scientific
development, sports development, cultural development, development in every
field.  We are not developing a society of beasts.  Capitalist society is a
society of beasts.  It is a zoo where the lions are loose and the
powerful eat up the weak ones like in the jungle.  Tigers stalk and hunt,
lions stalk and hunt;  They gulp the ones that are not careful.  This is
how a capitalist society functions despite the fact that some are dazzled
by its junk, by its junk.  It is a society of the jungle the society of the
beasts.

Socialism is a society of a man where the man is a brother of another man
and the man is not the one who eats up men; he is not pirate of other man,
looter of other man.  Socialism is different because of its enormous humane
and moral values.  The difference is endless.  Let time go by and we will
see how the experience accumulated by our people--because there are few
countries in the world tat have the experience ours have no matter what is
said.  Although our revolution is young, few countries in the world have
the unity level ours has, few have the level of political consciousness
ours has, few have the revolutionary spirit ours has, and few have the
internationalist spirit outs has. [applause]

We know what we have and we know what we can do.  With what we have and
with what we can do, we shall march forward and we shall not be stopped by
anyone or anything!  Fatherland or death!  We shall win!  [applause]
-END-


 |

