
FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
1.  [Text] Cuban television last night broadcast on both its channels the
speech by our commander in chief at the Council of State meeting convened to
discuss case No 1 of 1989 of the special military tribunal. During the meeting,
the death sentence was ratified for four of those involved in the case.

2.  Fidel said that this legal process was characterized by its exceptional
fairness [limpieza] and its extensive participation, information, quality, and
equality.

3.  The president of the Cuban Council of State gave an extensive summary of
the last stage of the war in Angola, which he described as the greatest
internationalist feat undertaken by Cuba. He said that these shameful and
detestable events, which have been sanctioned, occurred precisely when this
great feat was underway.

4.  Our commander in chief said that Ochoa [former Division General Arnaldo
Ochoa] could have saved himself during the first conversation he had with Raul
if hehad been frank and sincere, if he had assumed his responsibility, if he
had told the truth. Nevertheless, he added, we have had to search, investigate,
and work hard to discover all this information without Ochoa's cooperation.

5.  Fidel described the acts tried in case No 1--to sell out the country, put
it at risk, undermine the morale and prestige of the Revolution--as treason. He
said that we are going to recover and strengthen the credibility of the
Revolution throughout the world, not based on the acts of these sanctioned
individuals, but despite what they have done and in the manner in which the
country has confronted what they have done. The rectification process will win
because a better understanding will arise and the party will have much more
strength to make demands and sweep away everything that smells rotten.

6.  Fidel concluded by saying that on behalf of those who died fulfilling
internationalist missions, of the ideals they defended, and, of the fatherland
they dreamed about, we are obligated to be severe. He added his vote to the
unanimous ratification of the sentence of capital punishment and he called for
a formal vote after which he said: The Council of State ratifies the sentence
handed down by the special military tribunal. He also [words indistinct].
-END-


 |

