
FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
1.  [Station commentary]

2.  [Text] Cuban television viewers were able to enjoy a singularly important
event last night, and they can continue it today: the broadcast of the meeting
between Commander in Chief Fidel Castro and evangelicals in our country, which
took place on 2 April.  In an exchange without protocol; frank, open, and
sincere--as Fidel himself said--almost 100 representatives of the various Cuban
evangelical denominations set forth to the highest representative of the
government and party their points of view about the revolution and Christians.

3.  These are realities which are not antagonistic, and in the special moments
the country is experiencing today, harassed as never before by Yankee
imperialism and stressed economically by a very mixed situation on the
international level, unity is required.

4.  But perhaps the most important thing was that above and beyond the
stumbling blocks which at times have made behaviors that could converge and act
together incomprehensible, there was the Christians' solidarity with and
support for the revolution and Fidel.  In this infinitely human and important
dialogue, the Cuban Christians did not come to sanction or criticize, or even
to ask.  The Cuban Christians came to this meeting to express support,
firmness, and patriotism, above and beyond conceptual issues and with a single
faith: that we will become better day by day.

5.  Christians of Baragua, as one of the pastors said-- referring to the
support that community gives to the Cuban revolution.  For those who from
politicized pulpits have striven to confuse, raising false barriers between
believers and revolutionaries, between Christians and Marxists, the lesson is
very clear.  The community declared that it prayed for Fidel so he would be
wise, so he would be just, so he would be in good health.

6.  And a very great lesson came out of the meeting: Cuba is united; Cubans are
together beyond creeds, united with their people along with their revolution,
and with an olive-green pastor who has shown that he is always on the side of
the poor of the earth.
-END-


 |

