
FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
1.  [Text] Latin America has the duty of fighting against the Yankee isolation
and balkanization policy and of continuing to move the continent's nations
closer. This was stated by our Commander in Chief Fidel Castro in the Brazilian
capital. In his first news conference in Brazil, the leader of the revolution
stressed that if we do not unite we will be colonialized. This is why, he said,
everyone's instinct calls for moving closer.

2.  Fidel said to over 600 reporters and public that his visit to Brazil on the
occasion of the transfer of presidential powers seeks to establish closer ties
between Cuba and Brazil and move closer to Latin American nations. In his
remarks, the president of the Councils of State and Ministers also said the
Yankees are the only obstacle to Cuba's possibly rejoining the OAS. If Latin
American countries deem it convenient, said Fidel during the news conference in
Brazil, we are willing to rejoin the OAS. He added, this reaction is part of
our solidarity.

3.  Fidel also referred to the future of the continent and said the fundamental
problem now is not the building of socialism in one territory or another but
independence, wisdom, and solving economic and social difficulties.

4.  Responding to a question on democratic opening in Brazil, Argentina, Chile,
and Uruguay, the leader of the revolution said the Cuban people were pleased to
hear about those processes which are unquestionably positive steps.
Nevertheless, added Fidel, the terrible social and economic conditions which
are at the limits of tolerance and tend to worsen in those countries are reason
for concern.

5.  Responding to a question posed by a LOS ANGELES TIMES reporter, our
commander in chief noted that the Yankee invasion on Panama was an insolent and
shameless act, a massacre of Latin Americans. He also said the intervention was
a child of dominance, arrogance, and even stupidity, while it constituted a
military practice and an opportunity to test new weapons.

6.  Regarding the current situation in Nicaragua, Fidel said the Sandinists
cannot surrender or commit suicide and should act through political means, but
if they are repressed or victims of attacks, they will use weapons to defend
themselves. He also explained that since capitalism never gives up,
revolutionaries should never surrender either even if they are a minority.

7.  Fidel Castro exchanged views with dozens of political, religious, and media
personalities. According to news reports from Brasilia, Fidel met with Costa
Rican President Oscar Arias, Venezuela's Carlos Andres Perez, and Spanish Prime
Minister Felipe Gonzalez. Accompanied by Juan Escalona, president of the
National Assembly of the People's Government, and Cuban Ambassador to Brazil
Jorge Bolanos, the top leader of the revolution also talked to Colombian
statesman Virgilio Barco at the Colombian Embassy.

8.  Fidel's second day of work at the Brazilian capital ended after a meeting
with Brazilian Senator Ulysses Guimaraes.
-END-


 |

