
FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
1.  [Text] Commander in Chief Fidel Castro Ruz, president of the Councils of
State and Ministers, talked for more than half an hour with the thousands of
young people present in Maceo Park in Havana awaiting 4 April, a happy day and
the anniversary of the Union of Young Communists and Jose Marti Pioneers
Organization. The first secretary of the Communist Party of Cuba told the young
people about his answers to the foreign journalists who had come to Havana to
participate in the news conference held on the U.S. television hostilities
against Cuba. Fidel said: We Cubans prefer to die rather than not be free, I
answered to some of them.

2.  [Begin Castro recording] Only in freedom, honor, dignity, in the high goals
that a human being can set for himself, can there be true joy, true happiness.
I was thinking and meditating: These are our young people, and these young
people are joyful. These young people are happy. These young people are, as
someone said, educated. These young people are very politically aware.  These
young people are very revolutionarily aware.

3.  What we want for these young people is an honorable future, a dignified
future, a happy future, a joyful future, a future of freedom. What we want for
all of them is the best of all imaginable worlds. We want them to be safe.  We
want the most one can want for people.

4.  We do not want for these young people the rottenness of capitalism, the
selfishness of capitalism, the vices of capitalism. We do not want for these
young people, nor can we want it, that hateful world we have left in the past.
We do not want to go back to being a dependent country. We do not want to go
back to being a country with owners. We do not want to go back to being a
people with masters. We do not want to follow that road, which is so
dishonorable. [end recording]

5.  The dialogue of the leader of the revolution became animated with the
exchange generated spontaneously by the responses of the young people
themselves.

6.  [Begin Castro recording] Therefore, to those who are concerned, who are
truly concerned and are sincerely capable of being concerned about our future,
we say, and we have said: We prefer death to slavery. We will not renounce for
any reason, under any circumstances, because of any difficulties, the road we
have chosen. [end recording]
-END-


 |

