
FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
1.  [Report by Dulce Maria Corbelle]

2.  [Text] Fidel Castro, president of the Cuban Councils of State and
Ministers, today vehemently called for finding an urgent solution to the
conflict in the Persian Gulf and to avoid U.S. military intervention in the
region.

3.  In a letter sent to the region's chiefs of state and government, the Cuban
leader said he firmly believes that they still hold in their hands the
possibility of preventing the crisis from becoming an adverse situation for the
independence of many Arab states, an economic catastrophe, and a holocaust that
would affect a large number of their peoples. In his message, Commander in
Chief Fidel Castro stressed the threat he sees being created by the growing and
accelerated preparations the U.S. military and its allies are taking for direct
intervention in the region. He warns that this threat extends, without any
possible exception, to all countries of the Third World in the most sensitive
areas of the economy, security, and the independence of each nation.

4.  Copies of the letter Fidel Castro sent to Arab leaders were presented to UN
Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar and distributed as an official
document to members of the UN Security Council.

5.  In his message, the Cuban president stresses that the regressive [as heard]
and despoiling forces will not be detained by the consequences of a military
intervention, such as the one the United States is attempting, in which Arabs
and Moslems would be divided and would shed their own blood. The first
secretary of the Communist Party of Cuba stressed that the intervention would
create such profound wounds in those peoples that it would take dozens of years
to recover. In addition, their war would cause immeasurable damage to the
infrastructure and economies of all Arab countries that become war zones.

6.  Fidel Castro's letter to the Arab leaders explains Cuba's position in the
UN Security Council and stresses that our country did not hesitate in adding
its vote to the resolution that condemned the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. 
Nevertheless, it also expresses Cuba's disagreement with the application of
mandatory economic sanctions against Iraq, an action that it says is rash and
makes it difficult to reach a peaceful solution to the problem.
-END-


 |

