
FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
1.  [Report by Gisela Bel Heredia on the ``Haciendo Radio'' program]

2.  [Excerpts] The Attorney General's report on economic crime was the center
of discussion during the last hours of the first day of the regular session of
the National Assembly of the People's Government [ANPP]. [passage omitted]

3.  Several speakers participated in the discussion on the Attorney General's
report which centered on economic crimes. Then Commander in Chief Fidel Castro
said:

4.  [Begin Castro recording] I think this is a demonstration of collective
crime. All those who do not pay bus fares commit embezzlement. It has the worst
effect on morale.  These kinds of crimes are collective because this is a
country where money is in excess; it is not necessary.  This has been proven by
all that was discussed here.  What is the percentage of people who do not pay
bus fares?  Citizens get used to committing a crime, a small crime, but a crime
nonetheless. It is a moral crime. How can you forgive the civil action of those
who do not pay the modest contribution of 10 centavos for a drive? It is only
half of the real cost of the fare.  It does not matter if the bus is full or
empty.

5.  Similar things were discussed during the CTC [Cuban Workers Federation]
assembly.  The union released some statistics on the decrease in the number of
things missing.  Chavez [Pedro Chavez, president of the Havana City ANPP]
intervened.  I put forward the need to fight the problem with the masses,
establishing closer supervision.  I think the problem is greater in Havana. The
problem exists throughout the island, but Havana is the champion of all that is
bad.  It is good in many things, such as in sports for instance. Havana has a
good working class, people who answer the call for cleaning the city, and
things like that.  But a proposal was made during that meeting.... [end
recording in progress]

6.  The ANPP will continue discussing the General Attorney's report at the
Palace of Conventions today at 0900.
-END-


 |

