
FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
1.  [Text] Commander in Chief Fidel Castro Ruz, first secretary of the
Communist Party of Cuba [PCC] Central Committee and president of the Councils
of State and Ministers, has attended the final emulation ceremony of the
Antonio Maceo Contingent which supported the Guines municipality food program
in Havana Province.

2.  Also present at the ceremony were Army General Raul Castro, PCC second
secretary and minister of the Revolutionary Armed Forces [Minfar], and other
PCC, government, and high-ranking Minfar officials.

3.  The Antonio Maceo Contingent is made up of FAR youths who, after fulfilling
their duties for one month at the Paraiso Camp of the Union of Young Communists
[UJC], decided to extend their duties for up to 45 days.  [Words indistinct] 67
percent, the highest percentage that has ever been achieved by this recently
established camp. Fidel and Raul handed out distinguished service certificates
to 10 of these boys, while others were handed honor certificates.

4.  [Begin Castro recording] I remember that I visited this camp when the first
group was detached, and I see a lot of changes have been made. [Words
indistinct] cadres have been in this camp, and it has become a prestigious
institution at the provincial and national levels.

5.  I believe that with your efforts you have honored the name of the Armed
Forces. You are doing what must be done during this harsh and difficult period
we are experiencing. You have shown that you are men and women of Baragua who
do what must be done in view of the situation we are experiencing and because
the revolution demands it.

6.  The revolution has always demanded great effort, work, and sacrifices, but
this time it is demanding more hard work than ever before. [end recording]

7.  There was another happy event at the Paraiso camp: three couples were
married in a peasant atmosphere filled with youthful spirit. Fidel, Raul, and
the other leaders were witnesses at the wedding ceremony.
-END-


 |

