
FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
1.  [Remarks made by President Fidel Castro on hostilities beginning in the
Persian Gulf during a news conference on the Pan-American Games at Havana's
Habana Libre Hotel on 16 January--recorded]

2.  [Text] I have been just been told that combat has just begun in Iraq. Is
this so? At what time was it? [unidentified speaker responds: The Baghdad
airport was bombed at 1840, according to....] [Castro interrupts] According to
who? [unidentified speaker says: CNN reported that bombing could be heard] They
could be heard. I said this war was going to be broadcast on television.

3.  I am feeling the same sorrow you are feeling and the whole world must be
feeling. I also feel deep bitterness. I am fully aware of what this war could
mean in loss of human lives and a lot of material destruction. I also think
about the terrible consequences it is going to have for the economy of the
world, especially for Third World countries, and in the potential dangers the
war itself can bring. This war should have never been unleashed. As I said
earlier, it was unnecessary in order to reach the goals the United Nations
sought. Anything can happen there, even ecological disasters if those oil wells
begin to burn.  This is what I feel.

4.  The fact that the war broke out is a failure for the United Nations, a
failure for the politicians of our times. It shows the inability of the
international organizations, and the inability of the politicians of our times
to solve the problems by peaceful means. [Netherlands journalist asks:
According to you, who is responsible for this war?] I think everybody is
responsible for this war. First, colonialism which ruled the world and left
many of these problems as a legacy [is responsible]. The inequalities the world
is facing is responsible for the war. The hegemonic policies are to blame. I do
not want to hurt the feelings of the American visitors here but I believe that
the U.S.  hegemonic policy has a lot to do with it.

5.  I also think the actions initiated by Iraq's leadership are responsible for
it. This cannot be denied. We understood that those actions could lead to war.
In our messages to the Iraqis we made great efforts so that they would rectify
their positions. We believed that what they had done was politically wrong.
They based their arguments on ethical, legal, historic, religious, and
nationalist reasons. We analyzed the problem from the political point of view.
Those actions led the United States to organize a large political and military
coalition which even included Arab and Moslem countries.

6.  We used our best arguments and a realistic logic to persuade the Iraqis to
rectify their actions. They used a different logic. They said Kuwait belonged
historically to the same Iraqi community. They used historic and legal
arguments. They said Kuwait was a result of colonialism.  They argued that the
United States invaded Grenada and no sanctions were imposed, that it invaded
Panama and no sanctions were imposed. Also, they said Arab countries were
attacked, their territories were occupied and no sanctions were imposed. They
said there was a double standard at the Security Council. One standard was used
for them [the U.S.] and one for others. They also referred to the rights of the
Arab countries. They said this was an Arab matter and it should be solved among
Arabs. They used a number of arguments which included even cultural and
religious arguments. These were the arguments they used in response to the
realistic political logic we presented to them.

7.  Ultimately, the responsibility of the war lies on those who shot the first
bullet, the ones who began the war. I believe this responsibility is shared
among a number of UN countries. The responsibility of the war that has just
begun lies basically on the United States. The United States has been
determined to wage war when a solution could have been found without the need
to resort to war.

8.  So you see how our news conference on the Pan-American Games has turned
into .... [changes thought] It is logical in view of the events. I hope that at
a moment like this people will not be so concerned about sports.

9.  The two antitheses are seen here: the war and peace as in Tolstoy's novel.
The war is being waged in Iraq and the Middle East and we are gathered here to
discuss the matters regarding the Pan-American Games to be held this year.
-END-


