
FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
1.  [``Excerpt'' of speech by President Fidel Castro at the inauguration of the
Latin American Center for Evaluation and Treatment of the Elderly at the
Calixto Garcia Hospital in Havana on 7 May-recorded]

2.  [Text] Well, I was saying that the members of the gerontology association
have been the main boosters and promoters of this center. We have given it the
same support that is given to all the efforts that are made in this regard. But
they have fought, worked, and promoted it. In the visitor's book I wrote that I
wished them success as great as the enthusiasm with which they have created
this center. In addition, in my opinion they have done this in an economical,
simple, and at the same time efficient manner because they have rebuilt a new
wing which has almost 100 beds and turned it into individual rooms. This
improves the quality of this hospital. In the future all its facilities should
be like this. They freed up this smaller space. I think that this is a good
facility for the beginning of this center. As he [not further identified] said,
by recommendation of the WHO, they put it within a hospital.

3.  Really this is one of the oldest hospitals. If not the oldest, it is still
quite old. There are a few that are older, from the last century, of the mutual
aid societies. How old is this hospital? [answer indistinct] 1800 what?
[unidentified speaker: ``1896.''] 1896? In the middle of the war for
independence? Was it a public hospital at that time? It was a military
hospital, of course, in the middle of the war. That explains why this hospital
was opened in 1896, although in general the Spaniards showed a lot of interest
in health care. Because we must say that the mutual aid institutions organized
by the Spaniards were wonderful institutions. It was an economical way of
providing medical care to the populace, when medical services were poor. Really
you could not go to the public hospitals. This hospital will soon be 100 years
old. I imagine that you will celebrate that also, right? [laughter]

4.  Now, this hospital, as Abelardo [not further identified] said, has been a
school for a large number of professionals and many prominent figures in
medicine. It was a university hospital, a teaching hospital. It was the only
one. Today, all the hospitals in the country are teaching hospitals. Not only
are all the hospitals in the country teaching hospitals but also all the
polyclinics are teaching polyclinics. Because the specialists in general
medicine are trained at the polyclinics, and the specialists are teachers
there. This is a concept that has been spread to all the hospitals in the
country. A municipal hospital may be a teaching hospital. But this is the only
one that existed, and so generations of outstanding doctors were trained here.

5.  He mentioned that nowadays in many institutions there are doctors who were
trained here. A great portion of the personnel who opened the Hermanos
Ameijeiras Hospital-a very modern hospital-were trained here at the Calixto
Garcia. This hospital has continued training professionals. Today, it is a
school; it is part of the Medical Sciences Institute. It is one of
the...[pauses] Abelardito, how many schools are there in Havana?  [answers
indistinct] Eight or seven? How many? Well, then there are seven. Seven which
train doctors, right?  The Calixto Garcia Hospital is a school. How many
students are enrolled at the Calixto Garcia? How many?  [answers indistinct] Of
course. It had one building before. (?You) never had one. The building where
the Biology School is located now, what was it back then? It was the School of
Medicine, the only one in Havana.  Now the Biology School is located there, but
we have plans to build a new Biology School in order to return that building,
which is nearby, to the medical school.

6.  You know that we had a beautiful plan to modernize this hospital by
building a center with an expanded capacity of approximately 300 beds and all
the operating rooms.  All the wings were going to be modernized and turned into
individual rooms, because we still have open wards in many of these wings. We
had made great progress in preparing the plans; they were in a very advanced
stage.  We would be building it right now if it were not for the situation
created by the special period. We still have the hope that these plans will
someday become reality.

7.  In the meantime we can renovate at least one wing, if not the whole
hospital. We can continue to create institutions such as this center. Many
other things can be done because even under conditions which are difficult for
our current economy at this time, we can continue to do things. Because when it
comes down to it, the important thing in all of this is not money. Money is
necessary, yes, it is necessary because all kinds of expenditures have to be
made. These hospitals cost money. The materials cost money. [words indistinct]
Fortunately, much of the equipment was already being produced in the country,
but we have to import other types. The most important thing is people, the
human personnel, doctors, nurses, and technicians. It is all the workers at a
hospital institution who establish its quality.

8.  Therefore, although we might not be able to build new hospitals for a
while, with what we have, the ones we have built, the ones that we have
modernized, and the ones being completed-there are a number of hospitals that
were being built when the special period began-we will be able to provide
medical services for many years.  These medical services, even during the
special period, can and should continue to improve.

9.  How many doctors does Cuba currently have? It has more than 40,000. What?
42,000. But 4,000 will be graduating this summer. In July or August? During
July and August 4,000 more doctors will be graduating in Cuba. It is getting
harder to keep a tally on the number of doctors and to know how many we have.
Prieto [not further identified] was saying: See, these are the consultants. 
Fine, but we cannot know them all because they come from everywhere; although
some of them we do know because they are well known. He said: These are the
Cubans, the Cuban staff; you know some of them. I said: Yes, I know some of
them, but it is getting harder and harder to know all the doctors here. In a
country with more than 40,000 doctors, it is impossible to meet them all. What
also makes it harder is that every one of them is employed.

10.  I wonder how many of them are going to become prominent through social
medicine and the cooperation among all the hospitals. What makes our medical
research so much easier? The fact that all our hospitals cooperate with one
another instead of engaging in a war against each other. The research centers
cooperate with one another instead of competing or fighting against each other.
This is the great advantage that our system offers for the development of
science. If we have to carry out a protocol, we have the cooperation of all the
hospitals to carry out the protocol. If we have to do any research project, we
have the cooperation of all the hospitals and the scientific research centers.

11.  This is why our medical and health-related biotechnology research is
advancing at such an incredible speed.  This is also why high technology
medical equipment is developing with such speed, because we unite our efforts. 
Instead of dividing efforts and minds, we put minds together. This is the same
as multiplying them because nothing is as highly valued as [words indistinct]
operation.  [applause]





-END-


 |

