
FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
1.  [Part 5 of interview with President Fidel Castro by Nicaragua's Tomas Borge
in Havana; date not given- published on 4 June by Mexico City EXCELSIOR and
Madrid EL PAIS; Part IV published in the 9 June Latin America DAILY REPORT
pages 2-4]

2.  [Text] [Borge] What are the most important products manufactured in
scientific biotechnical and pharmacological laboratories?

3.  [Castro] One of the most important is the B-type meningococcal virus
vaccine because it is the only one in the world and its efficiency is
impressive. We have obtained an epidermic growth factor and it is being handled
by one or two transnationals. We also have streptokinase, a product we have
obtained through genetic engineering, which makes it much cheaper than the one
obtained through other procedures. It is highly efficient when needed to
paralyze an infarction and prevent the necrosis of heart muscles affected by an
infarction. This is a really impressive development.

4.  I can mention the vaccine for viral hepatitis B. Its quality is high and it
is highly efficient.

5.  We have been working on monoclonal antibodies, which can be used for a
diagnose or for therapeutic purposes.  We have developed different types of
interferon. We have been developing several blood by-products, such as
Intaeglobin, which is tremendously efficient against infections, above all in
newborns.

6.  One of the most important products we have developed is one for
cholesterol. It is highly efficient, a natural product, and I think its uses
are many. Its commercial name is Ateromixol, but it is generally known as PPG-
it was first known by this acronym -but that is not its commercial name. It is
a highly efficient product with vast possibilities in blood circulation, heart
diseases, and circulatory problems. I do not want to expand on this because we
are still in the research phase.

7.  [Borge] It is said PPG increases the amatory level.

8.  [Castro] Well, PPG is also miraculous in that sense because it generally
improves a person's sex life. It is really a friend for lovers, but we are not
actually marketing it for that purpose because we are still developing the
appropriate medical protocols.

9.  We know a lot about this product. I will tell you a little, I would rather
tell you only a little about it. All I want to tell you is that, using this
product as a basis, we can manufacture a number of products with magnificent
properties.

10.  We are working on a vaccine against cholera and I think we will soon
obtain results. Researchers are very optimistic about the possibility of
finding an efficient vaccine against this disease because the existing one is
less than 50 percent effective and its durability is short.

11.  [Borge] Fidel, talking about this, it is said a chemical revolution has
followed the development of certain countries; and a physical revolution was
followed by a subsequent development. I wonder: If the syllogism works, is
development expected after a biotechnical revolution?

12.  [Castro] Yes, of course, it has become one of the essential elements of
development.

13.  We are now using biotechnology to produce new plant varieties. We are
using it in tissue cultures to find seeds.  For instance, we are developing
plantain plantations at a tremendous speed.

14.  Through biotechnology, we are developing biofertilizers-bacteria that
fertilize plants by taking nitrogen from the air and giving it to the plants,
either by combining with the plants, or with the soil, or rather with the
organic matter in the soil. We are developing biopesticides. The biopesticides
are obtained through these biotechnological processes.

15.  In these fields, we can compete with, and even beat, the developed
countries because we have cooperation among all the scientific research
centers. This cannot be achieved through research organized by private
enterprises.

16.  [Borge] How many scientific research centers does Cuba have at this
moment?

17.  [Castro] We have over 170 scientific research centers or units. Over 170!
There is no country in the third world with the level of scientific development
Cuba has achieved. There are many developed countries that do not have the
degree of scientific development Cuba has achieved in many fields.

18.  This must become one of the pillars of our country's development. One day,
this can have more value and importance than the income from the sugar
industry.

19.  [Borge] How are the difficulties in every day life expressed in the
inevitable problems they cause to the population?

20.  [Castro] The difficulties are many and serious, and the human being is
human, he suffers if he wants something and cannot have it, or if he wants more
and cannot have it. The human being also has understanding, intelligence, and
instincts. We consistently explain to the people what we do and how we do it.
That way we get tremendous cooperation from the people who know that our cause
is fair and that it must be defended.

21.  [Borge] In Latin America and the rest of the world there is insistent talk
about human rights in Cuba. Although you have already spoken about this topic,
I would like you to tell me what is the real situation of human rights in this
country?

22.  [Castro] I have the most sincere conviction-speaking serenely and
objectively-that no other country in the world has done more for human rights
than Cuba.

23.  Bear in mind, for instance, that in our country you do not see children
begging, homeless, or abandoned in the streets; but you see that in the rest of
the world, even in the developed countries. Basically in third world countries,
there are dozens and dozens of millions of abandoned and homeless children,
without parents or support, begging in the streets, swallowing fire, or putting
on some other spectacle to make a living: Could there be another country that
has done more for human rights than what we have done?

24.  If you consider that now children are sold and even exported to other
countries and commercial enterprises have been created for exporting children;
if you consider that children are marketed and sold in the world and with some
frequency there are cases in which children are sold so their vital organs can
be used for transplants; then you come across a country like ours in which not
a single one of those cases has occurred: Could there be a country that has
done more for human rights than ours?

25.  If you consider that child prostitution is widespread in the third world,
that children are even used for sexual trade or for sexual scenes and such
things, but there has not been a single such case in Cuba: Has any country done
more for human rights than ours?

26.  You will find, for example, that infant mortality in many countries is
more than 100 for every 1,000 born alive, that the average in Latin America is
above 60, which means that hundreds of thousands of children die every year,
and then you find that our country-a third world, underdeveloped county, a
country that has been blockaded, a country that is blockaded twice as much now-
has reduced infant mortality to 10.7 in children under one year of age, and
that in over 30 years of revolution the lives of hundreds of thousands of
children have been saved: Could there be a country that has done more for human
rights than Cuba?

27.  If you consider that life expectancy at birth has been increased
considerably, to over 75 years of age, from the time of the revolution to
today: Could there be a country that has done more for human rights than Cuba?

28.  If you consider that the world in general, especially the third world, is
full of unemployed men, women, and youths, and senior citizens without any kind
of social protection, and you find that in our country all men and women, all
citizens, receive social protection through retirement, pensions, and social
security, and not a single citizen has been neglected throughout the years of
the revolution: Could there be a country that has done more for human rights
than Cuba?

29.  If you consider the influence that equality has on the human being and on
his happiness-equality of opportunity and treatment-if you realize that in our
country the irritating differences between the millionaires and the beggars
have disappeared: Could any country do more for human rights than Cuba?

30.  If you consider that in over 30 years, measures of force have never been
taken against our people, in over 30 years there has never been suppression of
a demonstration by workers, peasants, students, or other citizens; in over 30
years no policeman or soldier has ever been set against the people to beat or
repress them, nor have water trucks, tear gas, or birdshot been used, as is the
daily happening in developed capitalist countries and the third world, I ask
myself: Could there have been any country with more respect for civil or human
rights than our country?

-END-


 |

