FBIS-LAT-93-195 Daily Report 12 October 1993 CARIBBEAN Cuba
Castro Addresses First UBPC in Havana Province FL1110001793 Havana Tele Rebelde and Cuba Vision Networks in Spanish 0000 GMT 10 Oct 93 FL1110001793 Havana Tele Rebelde and Cuba Vision Networks Spanish BFN [Text] A few hours ago, Commander in Chief Fidel Castro attended the creation of the first Basic Cooperative Production Unit [UBPC] of mixed crops in Havana Province. [Begin Castro recording] I hope all of you, the members of this UBPC, take on these tasks with a great sense of honor and responsibility and that this first UBPC will be an example; that the success and experience you obtain can serve as encouragement and experience to the rest of the UBPC's. [words indistinct] very realistic, which we have done in organizing the agriculture. We have tried to transmit the best experiences of the Agricultural-Livestock Cooperatives [CPA] to this concept, without forgetting the great achievements obtained by the enterprises. I am sure that these great plans made by the country for the agriculture sector would not have been possible without the efforts of the state enterprises. The great dairy and farming plans like the [words indistinct] like those in Camaguey or Jaguey and many others. Microjet irrigation of hundreds of caballerias of plantains could only be accomplished under those organizational conditions. But we are faced by the special period, which has made everything more difficult. There was a great shortage of resources and it was important that each man make an even greater effort. It was necessary to end the people's exodus from the countryside to the city. We had to find a solution to the constant mobilizations. That is why [word indistinct] with a deep sense of reality, and after profoundly analyzing and considering a number of factors, the leadership of the party and government decided to adopt this form of organization, which links workers to the land and their production. It makes them owners of the production and of the means of production, which is a motivation to work. Therefore, the socialist form is applied, with each one receiving according to his work. With all these measures, we believe that during exceptional times such as these, our agriculture should adapt more to reality in its organization, even though the changes being made are definitive. This is not a temporary organization. It is a permanent organization. But, as I told the journalists, we must follow up on all good ideas in order to advance and meet goals. That is why we must follow up on this experience. [end recording] After departing with leaders and workers of the Simon Rodriguez UBPC, the commander in chief conversed with the national press present at the ceremony. [Begin Castro recording] They will have the same advantages as the cooperatives. They have the problem of self sufficiency, which has already been organized. They have good equipment and everything they need. The only difference is that the others contributed the land. These did not contribute the land. The first results seemed very good. From the moment that the phenomenon of the contingents... [changes thought] The majority of the contingents from the capital would like to be in the UBPC's. This demonstrates that this is a recovery, or the inverse of what had been happening: everyone wanted to leave the countryside to go to the cities. Now it is reversed. This movement is promoting the return from the cities to the countryside. They have very capable cadres of technicians and personnel, which the cooperatives did not have. Now, we need to apply the work techniques that the best CPA's were using, because not all the CPA's work in an efficient manner. But most of the CPA's are efficient and most of the them are excellent. They have another concept of the economy. We would like the UBPC's to have the same concept of the economy. This includes the reality, psychology, idiosyncrasy, and organization of agricultural production and the principle of remuneration according to work: a socialist principle. Maybe the state enterprises were more advanced than the UBPC's, but the UBPC's are more realistic. This is the conclusion we reached. [end recording] 
